
        
          Background
          CDKL1 is a member of the cell division cycle 2 (CDC2)-related serine threonine protein kinase family and is overexpressed in malignant tumors such as melanoma, breast cancer, and gastric cancer.
        
        
          Objective
          This study aimed to evaluate whether CDKL1 can serve as a potential molecular target for colorectal cancer therapy.
        
        
          Materials and methods
          Expression of CDKL1 in colorectal cancer tissues and cell lines was measured by immunohistochemistry and Western blot, respectively. To investigate the role of CDKL1 in colorectal cancer, CDKL1-small hairpin RNA-expressing lentivirus was constructed and infected into HCT116 and Caco2 cells. The effects of RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated CDKL1 downregulation on cell proliferation and invasion were assessed by CCK-8, colony formation, transwell, and tumorigenicity assays in nude mice. The effects of CDKL1 downregulation on cell cycle and apoptosis were analyzed by flow cytometry. Furthermore, microarray method and data analysis elucidated the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenomenon.
        
        
          Results
          CDKL1 protein was overexpressed in colorectal cancer tissues compared with paired normal tissues. Knockdown of CDKL1 in HCT116 and Caco2 significantly inhibited cell growth, colony formation ability, tumor invasion, and G1–S phase transition of the cell cycle. The knockdown of CDKL1 stimulated the upregulation of p15 and retinoblastoma protein.
        
        
          Conclusion
          CDKL1 plays a vital role in tumor proliferation and invasion in colorectal cancer in vitro and in vivo and, thus, may be considered as a valuable target for therapeutic intervention.
        
      
    
      Introduction
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths.1 With current therapeutic approaches, the prognosis of CRC is yet dismal. The pathogenesis of CRC is complex and occurs through the successive aberrant expression of tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes in the adenoma–carcinoma sequence.2 Throughout the process, the most important genes for CRC development are p53, RAS, and APC.2 Thus, identifying these biomarkers, defining them, and elaborating their functions will be the key to curing the disease.
      The cyclin-dependent kinase-like 1 (CDKL1) gene, also known as P42 or KKIALRE, located on chromosome 14q21.3, encodes 2 isoforms (with 276 and 358 amino acids) of a protein kinase with a putative cell division cycle 2 (CDC2)-related serine/threonine domain.3,4 The CDKL family consists of 5 members. The mammalian CDKL1 is predominantly expressed in the brain, lungs, kidneys, and ovaries.3,4 Zebrafish CDKL1, sharing a high degree of homology with the mammalian ortholog, plays an essential role in zebrafish development, and interference of its expression results in brain malformation and body axis curvature.5 Human CDKL1 and CDKL5 were reported to play important functions in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorder.4,6 Recently, CDKL1 has been reported to be upregulated in melanoma and breast and gastric cancers.7–9
      Dysregulation of human kinases has frequently been linked to a variety of human malignancies, including cancer. As we know, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) can trigger cell cycle progression, and their dysregulation contributes to unscheduled proliferation during tumor development.10 High nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio of CDK1 expression can predict poor prognosis in CRC patients.11 CDK8 is regarded as an oncogene of CRC that regulates β-catenin activity.12 Moreover, P57/Kip2 as an inhibitor of several cyclin–CDK complexes has been proven to be a tumor suppressor,13 and a variety of medications targeting CDKs have undergone clinical trials for gastrointestinal cancer, breast cancer, and leukemia.14,15 As a mimic of CDKs, whether CDKL1 is involved in the progression of human CRCs is not clear, and although some studies have shown associations between CDKL1 expression and cancers,7–9 the signaling pathway of CDKL1 remains elusive.
      In this study, we have found that CDKL1 is overexpressed in CRC and its suppression by RNA interference (RNAi) inhibits cell proliferation and invasion of CRC cells by impeding the cell cycle. Moreover, analysis of gene expression profiling after CDKL1 knockdown found several gene sets putatively involved in CRC progressions, such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling, RNA transcription, enzyme inhibitor activity, and chromosome maintenance. Furthermore, we confirmed that the P15-Rb (retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein) pathway is related to CDKL1 knockdown. Taken together, our findings suggest that CDKL1 might be a potent oncogene in CRC and, therefore, may represent a new target for therapeutic intervention.
    
    
      Materials and methods
      
        Clinical samples and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
        The investigated specimens (tumors and paired normal tissues) were collected randomly from 100 CRC patients with radical colectomy between January 2008 and December 2009 conducted at the Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, People’s Republic of China. IHC was performed as described previously.16 All sections were scored blindly by 2 investigators under a light microscope and recorded. CDKL1 expression was estimated using the criterion specified on The Human Protein Atlas website,17 based on the multiplication of intensity and percentage of the stained cells. The tissue staining was scored as negative (−), slightly positive (+), moderately positive (++), and strongly positive (+++). Ethical approval was obtained from the clinical research ethics committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Shanghai, People’s Republic of China). Written informed consent for the acquisition and use of tissue samples was obtained from all patients.
      
      
        Cell culture
        The CRC cell lines HT29, Caco2, SW480, SW620, RKO, Lovo, and DLD1 were obtained from the Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, People’s Republic of China), and HCT116 was obtained from KeyGen Biotech (Nanjing, People’s Republic of China). The HCT116 and HT29 cells were maintained in McCoy’s 5A medium (KeyGen Biotech); Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (HyClone, Logan, UT, USA) was used for Lovo, SW480, SW620, RKO, and Caco2, whereas DLD1 cell line was maintained in RPMI-1640 (Corning, Manassas, VA, USA). The media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco BRL, Grand Island, NY, USA) in an incubator with 5% CO2 at 37°C.
      
      
        Small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), plasmids, and cell transfection
        The shRNA target sequence (5′-AGCAAGTGTTTAGCACGAA-3′) for CDKL1 isotypes (NM_004196 and NM_001282236) was designed and constructed. Nonsense sequence (5′-TTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGT-3′) was designed and used as the shRNA control. CDKL1-shRNA and control-shRNA were cloned into GV115 plasmid vectors (GeneChem, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China) containing the green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene. Next, the plasmid vectors were packed into lentivirus particles. When the cells were confluent to 104 cells per well in 6-well plates, lentivirus particles with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 were added. The stably transfected GFP-expressing cells were detected using fluorescence microscopy (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), and Western blotting was performed with CDKL1 antibody.
      
      
        CCK-8 assay
        Lentivirus-infected cells in the logarithmic phase were seeded into 96-well plates at the density of 2,000 cells per well (HCT116) or 6,000 cells per well (Caco2), and the plates were incubated in 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. The cell viability was assessed by the CCK-8 assay at several time points in the next 2 days. Briefly, 10 μL CCK-8 solution was added to the cells and incubated. The optical density (OD) of each well was measured at 450 nm using the CCK-8 plate reader (Epoch™; BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
      
      
        Colony formation assay
        The cells in the logarithmic phase were inoculated into 6-well plates at densities of 200 and 800 cells per well for HCT116 and Caco2, respectively. The medium was replaced every week. When the cell numbers in most of the single colonies were >50, the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China) for 30 min, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and stained with 0.1% crystal violet (BioSharp, Hefei, People’s Republic of China). After washing the cells with double-distilled water, the clusters were imaged and the number of colonies were counted.
      
      
        Transwell assay
        The assay was performed with precoated cell invasion kit (pore size 8.0 μm; Corning Inc, New York, NY, USA) and Matrigel (250 μg/mL; BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA, USA) in transwell chambers. Cells at the density of 5×104 for HCT116 and 2×105 for Caco2 were then allowed to migrate from the medium chamber to that containing medium with 30% FBS in the lower chambers. The invaded cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde after 60 h of incubation and stained with 0.1% crystal violet. The cells that invaded through the membrane were counted under a light microscope (4 random fields per well).
      
      
        Flow cytometry analysis
        Cell culture supernatants and adherent cells were harvested and washed with PBS by centrifugation at 1,000 rpm. Then, the cells were fixed with 70% ethanol at −20°C for 2 h and stained with propidium iodide (PI) (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). After incubation for 15 min at room temperature in the dark, the cells were analyzed for DNA content using flow cytometry (FACS Aria; BD Biosciences). For the determination of apoptotic cell death, the cells were stained with Annexin V–APC (BD Biosciences) and PI, followed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BD Pharmingen). Fluorescence compensation was conducted to exclude the overlapping of the emission spectra. A total of 50,000 events were acquired for analysis using ModFit LT 3.2 software (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME, USA).
      
      
        Microarray and data analysis
        In order to detect the potential signaling pathways altered while knocking down CDKL1, we performed a gene expression profiling experiment using GeneChip Hybridization Oven 645, containing 22,000 probe sets (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Total RNA was prepared from control and RNAi DLD1 cells with TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA samples were quantified using NanoDrop 2000 (NanoDrop Technologies, Montchanin, DE, USA) and Agilent Bio-analyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The arrays were performed on GeneChip fluidics 450 workstation (Affymetrix) and GeneChip scanner 3000 (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Robust multichip analysis (RMA) was used for normalization to assess the level of background variability between hybridizations. In all the analyses, fold change (|FC|) was set as >2 and P-value as <0.01. Pathway and gene ontology analyses were carried out next. All microarray data, along with the design parameters, have been submitted to National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)’s Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO accession GSE94887).
      
      
        Western blot analysis
        Harvested cells were lysed, and the total protein was quantitated with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China). An equivalent of 40 μg protein extract was resolved using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes. Then, the blots were blocked with 5% milk, followed by incubation with the respective antibodies. The immunoreactive bands were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence kit (Thermo Fisher) and visualized with the Tanon-4500 Gel Imaging System (Tanon, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China). Tubulin, H3, and LaminB1 were used as internal controls. The antibodies used were as follows: anti-CDKL1 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK); anti-CDK4, anti-CDK6, anti-cyclinD1, and anti-LaminB1 (1:2,000, Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA); horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:10,000, Abbkine, Wuhan, Hubei, People’s Republic of China); and anti-H3, anti-P15, anti-Rb, anti-phospho-Rb (Ser807/811), and anti-Phospho-Rb (Ser780) (1:2,000, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA).
      
      
        In vivo tumorigenicity assay
        Four-week-old male BALB/c mice were purchased from Shanghai Sippr-BK Laboratory Animal Co Ltd, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China. Six animals per group (4 groups: control and RNAi groups for HCT116 or Caco2 cells) were used in each experiment. Briefly, HCT116 or Caco2 cells (expressing control-shRNA or CDKL1-shRNA) in 100 μL PBS at 1×108 cells/mL were inoculated into the armpit of the mice. The tumors were measured weekly using a Vernier caliper, and the tumor volume was calculated using the formula π/6× length × width2.18 Tumors were collected 4 weeks after inoculation. All studies were approved by the Animal Care Committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University. All mice were handled according to the Use of Laboratory Animals and the National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Care.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        CDKL1 expression in human tissues was analyzed by nonparametric analysis using the Wilcoxon test. All data were expressed as mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments, wherein each assay was performed in at least triplicates. The Student’s t-test was used to evaluate the differences between the control cells and CDKL1-knockdown cells using SPSS 17.0 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). P-values (2-sided) <0.05 were considered significant.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        CDKL1 is overexpressed in human CRC
        IHC was used for the detection of CDKL1 expression in the paraffin-embedded tissue samples of CRC patients (Figure 1). The results showed that CDKL1 protein was overexpressed in CRC tissue as compared to the adjacent normal tissue (P<0.01) (Table 1), primarily in the nucleus and less in the plasma. These results indicate that high levels of CDKL1 are present in CRC. Next, we searched for CRC cell lines that displayed high levels of CDKL1 expression. The expression of CDKL1 protein was confirmed by Western blotting (Figure 2A). Thus, we selected HCT116 and Caco2 cells for subsequent assays.
      
      
        CDKL1 knockdown affects proliferation and invasion of CRC cells
        As a kinase, CDKL1 overexpression in CRC suggested that it might be required for cancer proliferation. First, we successfully carried out infection of HCT116 and Caco2 with lentivirus, as evident by the fluorescence microscopy results and the protein levels (Figure 2B and C). The CCK-8 assay revealed that the number of viable cells in the CDKL1-shRNA group decreased significantly as compared to the control group (P<0.01, Figure 3A and B). In addition, the colony formation assay was performed to determine the tumorigenesis in vitro. The cells were grown and allowed to form colonies 14 days after infection. Compared to the control group, the number of colonies in HCT116 and Caco2 cells of the CDKL1-shRNA group was decreased significantly (P<0.01, Figure 3C and D). Furthermore, by the transwell assay, we observed that the migratory potential of the cells was decreased significantly when endogenous CDKL1 expression was knocked down by CDKL1-shRNA vectors in both cell lines (Figure 3E and F). Following these results, we conclude a critical role for CDKL1 in the proliferation and migratory potential of CRC cells.
      
      
        CDKL1 facilitates the transition from G1 to S phase in CRC cells
        Considering that CDKL1 is related to CDKs, we examined the effect of CDKL1 silencing on cell cycle regulation in CRC cell lines. The cell cycle profiling by FACS indicated that silencing of CDKL1 expression with shRNA resulted in an increased number of cells in the G1 phase in HCT116 and Caco2 cells (Figure 3G and H). However, no consistency was observed in the distribution of G2 and S stages of the 2 cell lines. These results suggest that CDKL1 promotes the proliferation of CRC cells by facilitating the transition from G1 to S phase. Moreover, the apoptosis assay revealed that CDKL1-shRNA lentivirus exerts little influence on apoptosis in both cell lines (Figure 3I and J).
      
      
        CDKL1 knockdown inhibits colon tumorigenesis in vivo
        To examine the effects of the silencing of CDKL1 on tumor growth in vivo, CRC cells that stably expressed control-shRNA or CDKL1-shRNA were inoculated into the armpit of BALB/c mice. All the animals developed tumors 7 days after inoculation. Moreover, 28 days after inoculation, the tumors of the control-shRNA animals were significantly larger than those of the CDKL1-shRNA group (Figure 4A and B). The mean tumor volume was 725.53±200.02 mm3 in mice inoculated with HCT116 cells that expressed control-shRNA as compared to 149.44±155.10 mm3 in the CDKL1-shRNA group (Figure 4C). On the other hand, the mean tumor volume in the Caco2 group was 1,200.33±436.99 mm3 (control-shRNA) as compared to 307.73±76.83 mm3 (CDKL1-shRNA) (Figure 4D). These data demonstrate the important role of CDKL1 in promoting the growth of colon cancer cells.
      
      
        Multiple signaling proteins are activated by CDKL1-shRNA vector
        Complementary DNA (cDNA) microarray identified that expression of 32 genes was upregulated while 21 genes were downregulated under the condition of |FC| >2 and P-value <0.01 (Figure 5A–C). Further analysis found that the gene sets involved in CDKL1 knockdown are components of TGF-β receptor signaling, cellular defense response, secretory pathway, RNA polymerase II transcription factor activity, enzyme inhibitor activity, chromosomes, membrane fractions, Toll pathway, pathogenic Escherichia coli infection, and spliceosomes. (Table 2) Next, Western blotting assay verified that knockdown of CDKL1 yielded a variably increased protein level of P15 (CDKN2B). Furthermore, examining the P15 cell cycle pathway molecules such as CDK4, CDK6, cyclinD1, Rb, and phosphorylated Rb revealed that total Rb was significantly upregulated after CDKL1 knockdown in both cell lines irrespective of CDK4/6 status, and cyclinD1 was upregulated in Caco2 (Figure 5D). However, the 2 cells shared no consistency on specific phosphorylation sites of Rb, such as Ser780 and Ser807/811.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      In the current study, the expression of CDKL1 protein increased significantly in tumor tissues as compared to the paired normal mucosa in CRC patients. It indicated that the high expression of CDKL1 might be correlated with CRC. Thus, to further explore the molecular function of CDKL1, we chose RNAi to disrupt the gene in human CRC cells and investigate the functional consequences. We found that the knockdown of CDKL1 led to inhibited proliferation, impaired cloning, lowered invasion ability, and stalled G1–S transition. Our study identified that CDKL1 may be a potential driver gene in CRC.
      Human cells harbor a large protein family composed of protein kinases, most of which are poorly studied, except CDKs.19 CDKs modulate the progression of the cell cycle by its sequential activation and inactivation.10,12 They are critical in regulating metabolism, cell division, and apoptosis by phosphorylation of diverse protein substrates. Their dysregulations directly or indirectly mediate unscheduled proliferation of most tumor cells. Human cells contain multiple CDKs, including CDK1, CDK2, and CDK4/6, several regulatory cyclins, as well as CDK inhibitors.20,21 For instance, CDK4/6 associates with cyclinD to regulate the cell cycle progression in the G1 phase; the complex senses cell mitogenic signals and prompts the cells to initiate DNA synthesis.10,14,20,22 The deregulation of these complexes has been implicated in a variety of cancers. Currently, in clinical practice, palbociclib is an orally administered cell cycle inhibitor, highly specific against CDK4/6.23 It can cause G1 cell cycle arrest and produce marked tumor regression in mice bearing human colon carcinoma.24 CDKL1 shares the same functional domains structurally as the CDKs, such as the cdc2 sequence features.3,5 The phylogenetic conservation of this molecule underscores their potential physiological similarity. Herein, we revealed that CDKL1 depletion led to an obvious arrest at the G0/G1 phase of CRC. Moreover, FACS results excluded the possibility that CDKL1 knockdown impedes CRC cell growth through apoptosis.
      To maintain G1 regulation, the activity of the CDK4/cyclinD complex is antagonized by CDK inhibitors such as the INK4 family, including INK4A, INK4B, INK4C, and INK4D, and the Cip and Kip family, composed of p21, p27, and p57.10,13,14 These cell cycle inhibitors have been shown to block proliferation of adult stem cells in multiple tissues. Among them, INK4B (P15) specifically inhibits the catalytic subunits of CDK4/6 involved in the regulation of G1–S phase transition.10,25 It is capable of inducing cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase and has been identified as a critical tumor suppressor.26,27 Thus, we decided to lay emphasis on P15 based on our microarray results after CDKL1 knockdown. Furthermore, we demonstrated that depletion of CDKL1 notably upregulated the protein expression of P15. P15 is shown to be a target of CDKL1 in CRC, either direct or indirect. However, further studies are essential for finding and verifying the partner or direct inhibitor of CDKL1. We also proved that as a downstream molecule of the P15 pathway, Rb is inhibited after CDKL1 knockdown. Rb is a well-known tumor suppressor in cell cycle regulation.28 Phosphorylation of Rb negatively regulates the cell cycle through E2F repression.29–31 However, Rb contains 13 conserved sites that are phosphorylated by the CDK–P15 complex in cycling cells and phosphorylation will cause site-specific and diverse conformational changes in the complex.32,33 Further studies need to be conducted to decipher the phosphorylated site of Rb related to CDKL1 knockdown. We found that the downstream molecules of P15 pathway such as cyclinD1 were inconsistent among HCT116 and Caco2, which may explain the different cell cycle distribution (S and G2 phases) between the 2 cell lines; however, further investigation is imperative. The MAPK pathway regulates diverse cellular functions including cell migration and is dysregulated in a variety of cancers.34 Our microarray results showed that DUSP1 and JUN, as 2 important molecules of the pathway, were dysregulated; this may lead to the attenuation of the invasion of CRC cells after CDKL1 knockdown. In addition, in the literature, there are no data relating CDKL1 with tumor invasion, so further experiments are required.
    
    
      Conclusion
      CDKL1 is a molecule of the complex cell cycle regulation network. Our study proves that CDKL1 expression contributes to CRC progression. The underlying mechanisms of CDKL1 activity and its substrates may lead to its use as a potential therapeutic target for CRC patients.
    
  
        The “Hypoxia Nantes 2016” organized its second conference dedicated to the field of hypoxia research. This conference focused on “the role of hypoxia under physiological conditions as well as in cancer” and took place in Nantes, France, in October 6–7, 2016. The main objective of this conference was to bring together a large group of scientists from different spheres of hypoxia. Recent advances were presented and discussed around different topics: genomics, physiology, musculoskeletal, stem cells, microenvironment and cancer, and oxidative stress. This review summarizes the major highlights of the meeting.
      
    
      Introduction
      Maintenance of oxygen homeostasis is a fundamental physiological challenge. Dysregulation of homeostasis with a consequent hypoxia is a component of many human diseases. Transcriptional response to hypoxia is mediated by hypoxia inducible factors (HIF1–3), the oxygen-sensitive signal being generated by a series of protein hydroxylases that catalyze prolyl and asparaginyl hydroxylation on specific residues in the regulatory HIF-α subunits (HIF1α, HIF-2α, and HIF-3α). Mammalian HIF-α subunits contain two hydroxylation sites called NODD (N-terminal Oxygen-dependant Degradation Domain) and CODD (C-terminal Oxygen-dependant Degradation Domain). In the presence of oxygen, prolyl hydroxylation by prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins (PHD1–4) directs HIF-α for proteasome destruction following binding by the product of the tumor suppressor gene von Hippel–Lindau (pVHL) and ubiquitination (Figure 1).1,2 In addition, asparaginyl hydroxylation by factor inhibiting HIF (FIH) blocks recruitment of HIF co-factors. The HIF hydroxylases belong to two distinct groups of Fe(II)- and 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG)-dependent dioxygenase, which split O2 and couple oxidation (hydroxylation) of HIF-α to oxidative decarboxylation of 2-OG to succinate and CO2. PHD2, in particular, has been described to play a dominant role in oxygen sensing.3,4 In the absence of oxygen, hydroxylases are inhibited, HIF-α factors are stabilized, enter the nucleus, and associate with HIF-β subunits (ie, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocators ARNT1 or ARNT2) and cofactors (p300). These complexes form active transcription factors that bind hypoxia responsive elements (HREs) and drive the expressions of more than hundred target genes.5,6 These transcripts encode proteins that play a role in multiple biological pathways (cell survival, erythropoiesis, angiogenesis, metabolism, etc).7,8 The panel of genes expressed in different cell types is specific, and their regulation by different HIF isoforms is complex and still puzzling. In the meeting, Prof P Ratcliffe and Prof I Ragoussis presented recent pan-genomic studies that revealed some aspects of the hypoxia pathway complexity.
    
    
      Complexity of the Hypoxia pathway
      
        Complex HIF hydroxylase modulation and transcriptional architecture of HIF-1α versus HIF-2α binding
        Prof P Ratcliffe provided an overview of the HIF hydroxylase pathway and considered opportunities and challenges in its therapeutic modulation, specifically whether it might be possible (and advantageous) to modulate specific components of the pathway under specific clinical settings. The evolution of the HIF prolyl hydroxylase pathway was outlined, highlighting the primitive PHD2/HIF-1α/VHL triad.9 Of particular relevance to the question of specific therapeutic modulation is the appearance of multiple HIF and PHD isoforms, through gene duplication events at the base of vertebrate evolution.10 This raises a question as to what extent these different isoforms have particular functions in the specialized oxygen delivery systems (the blood, vascular, and cardiopulmonary systems) of vertebrates, which are often the target of diseases. As a paradigm, the question of whether PHD inhibition could generate medically useful, isoform specific, activation of HIF-1α versus HIF-2α was considered.
        Although the differential regulation of HIF-α isoforms is not completely understood, they demonstrate differential dependence on each of two prolyl hydroxylation sites in the N-terminal and C-terminal portions of their oxygen-dependent degradation domains (NODD and CODD).11 Thus, inhibitors that operate differentially on the hydroxylation of each of these sites might impart at least partial HIF-α isoform selectivity. Initial evidence that this might be possible has been provided by the action of human mutations in PHD2, some of which generate striking differences in hydroxylation of HIF-1α NODD versus CODD.12 The feasibility of generating relatively specific inhibitors is also supported by differences in the binding of human NODD and CODD to PHD212 and from the ability of some, but not all, PHD inhibitors to displace CODD substrate as well as 2-OG from PHD2.13 All the PHDs, and ~60–70 other human dioxygenases in this family, use 2-OG as co-substrate; hence, inhibitors that simply act as 2-OG analogs are unlikely to be highly specific.14 Thus, it was argued that greater efforts would be required to develop substrate specific inhibitors and that at least some selectivity would likely be feasible.
        In light of this, recent work on the functional differentiation of HIF-1α versus HIF-2α was considered from two contrasting perspectives: 1) transcriptional biology, as assessed by pan-genomic assays of the HIF transcriptional response using ChIPseq and RNAseq analyses, and 2) the integrated physiology of hypoxia, assessed in recombinant mice bearing inactivating alleles of HIF-1α and HIF-2α.
        As an example of HIF-α isoform-specific actions on integrated physiology, recent work on erythropoiesis and ventilator sensitivity to hypoxia was considered.15,16 Increased erythropoiesis and enhanced ventilator sensitivity to hypoxia are key physiological components of the process of acute acclimatization. Direct comparison of conditional inactivation of HIF-1α with HIF-2α in adult life (as a surrogate for potential actions of specific pharmacological intervention) reveals marked specificity for the HIF-2α isoforms, at least under the conditions of experimental testing.15,16 This is consistent with, and likely in part driven by, contrasting patterns of expression. HIF-2α is expressed at much higher levels in the renal erythropoietin-producing fibroblasts and in the type 1 cells of the carotid body.17,18 Thus, it might be concluded that specific activation of HIF-2α would be of value in therapeutic strategies that aimed to augment these responses (ie, in the correction of anemia or in the stimulation of ventilation).
        As a counterpoise to this work, recent insights into the transcriptional biology of HIF were then considered from the perspective of pan-genomic studies that contrast patterns of HIF1α and HIF-2α at transcriptional target loci. These studies have defined distinct, though partially overlapping, sets of DNA binding sites for HIF-1α and HIF-2α.19 Depending on the level of analytical stringency applied, each isoform binds at hundreds to a few thousand sites, at levels sufficient to have an effect on transcription. No differences for HIF-1α versus HIF-2α are seen in consensus binding sequences. However, marked differences are observed across the genome in the distribution of binding at >106 potential hypoxia response elements in open chromatin. Gene ontology programs define differences in the functional pathways associated with gene loci that preferentially bind HIF-1α or HIF-2α, but these are generally not tightly demarcated; rather moderate pathway bias is observed in one or other isoform.20 Interestingly, significant biases are also observed in the type of transcriptional target, with HIF-2α showing greater enrichment than HIF-1α at loci associated with long non-coding RNAs.21 However, the most striking differences are observed in the distance between the HIF-α binding sites and gene promoters.20,22 HIF-1α is much more frequently bound close to promoters, with HIF-2α being more commonly bound at a distance from promoters. Moreover, even when both the HIF-α isoforms bound close to a promoter, functional studies reveal that it is generally HIF-1α that mediates the transcriptional response.23 Thus, when considered both are considered at the level of transcriptional biology and in the setting of integrated physiology, HIF-2α manifests features consistent with it being the “modern” isoform. HIF-2α mediates several of the adaptive responses to hypoxia that are specific to higher animals; it binds and functions at greater distances from its target genes, its expression is more cell-type specific, and it exhibits more frequent interactions with non-coding RNA networks. However, none of these properties is absolutely specific.
        In the discussion, it was speculated that this lack of clear organization was a fundamental reflection of Darwinian evolution, in which mutations are generated agnostically and alter specific biochemical processes, but selection is applied to the performance of integrated physiological systems. This process runs counter to the aim of dissecting highly specific drug targets out of complex systems. The conclusions were that the development of more specific HIF hydroxylase inhibitors, which target components of the HIF pathway with moderate levels of selectivity, would be feasible. Nevertheless, accurate predictions about what might or might not be useful in a specific medicinal situation remain difficult. The development of multiple inhibitors with diverse kinetic and chemical properties, coupled careful testing in physiological models, and (ideally) human experimental medicine studies, would be an ideal approach to this new area of medicine development.
      
      
        Complex expression of genes in hypoxia identified by RNAseq
        A major part of the adaptive response to hypoxia is mediated through transcriptional regulation, with the HIF transcription factors taking central stage. As presented by Prof I Ragoussis, the detailed study of the transcriptional response is conditional upon developing and applying genomic technologies that allow the global characterization of a wide universe of transcripts in the cell. Methodological developments utilizing the power of short read next generation sequencing technology have been applied, which allow the analysis of long and short transcripts following the removal of the highly abundant ribosomal RNA, while also retaining information on transcriptional orientation. Thus, for the first time, it was possible to identify global transcriptional changes under hypoxia in all classes of coding and non-coding RNAs, including small RNAs.21 As a result, our understanding of the transcriptional response to hypoxia is greatly enhanced and now covers the entire spectrum of RNAs, coding and non-coding, regulatory, microRNAs, t-RNAs, small nuclear RNAs, and others. In addition, through the integration of ChIP data produced using antibodies against HIF-1α, HIF-2α, HIF-1β, and PolII as well as the histones H3K4Me3 and H3K4me1, it was possible to determine that poised PolII is localized at the promoters of both coding and non-coding transcripts, the increased transcription of which is associated with HIF binding.21 More recently, this binding has been determined to take place at pre-existing promoter, promoter–enhancer, and enhancer–enhancer interactions using chromatin conformation assays.23 The role of long non-coding RNAs in hypoxia response is now the focus of intense research.24 Typical examples include HIF-2α regulated lncRNA NEAT1 that leads to the identification of paraspeckle formation as a response to hypoxia25 in breast cancer cells, whereas H19 is found to play a role in cell cycle in hypoxic HUVEC cells.26
        There is good evidence that alternative splicing contributes to a substantial part of the hypoxic response and is also directly regulated by HIF and can lead to the production of non-coding mRNA isoforms implicated in upregulated genes.27–30 Sena et al27 observed a dichotomy between high frequency of exon inclusion in hypoxia up-regulated genes, whereas exon exclusion was found predominant in downregulated genes using HEP3B cells. Following that, Memon et al29 observed that there is a major switch to non-coding isoforms in hypoxic HTCC116 human colon carcinoma cells, which was recapitulated in a large set of colorectal cancer samples from TCGA. More work is needed in a wider range of tissues and cancers in order to confirm the observations related to HIF’s role in splicing, the trends related to up- or down-regulated transcripts and any pathway-specific splicing effects, but it is clear that alternative splicing plays a major role in the hypoxia response.
        In terms of technological developments, inferring alternatively spliced isoforms of genes from short read data through statistical assignment of the most probable combination of exons is still computationally challenging and not very accurate. New, single molecule sequencing technologies are now enabling the direct sequencing of complete cDNA or even RNA molecules and their application31,32 has the potential to allow the characterization of the hypoxia transcriptome at even higher resolution.
      
    
    
      Hypoxia pathway in physiology and therapies
      In the meeting, sessions were dedicated to the physiological aspects of hypoxia. In fact, the physiological reaction to low oxygen induces adaptation and is essential to cell survival. As described earlier, the HIFs induce the expression of hundred of genes that play roles in many biological pathways.
      
        Role on glucose and lipid metabolism
        Prof P Koivunen presented HIF target genes and use of mouse models to study the connection of HIF with glucose and lipid metabolism. In agreement with a key role of hypoxia in lipid metabolism, genetic inhibition of Phd2 has recently been shown to reduce body weight and the amount of white adipose tissue (WAT) in mice.33 These mice hypomorphic for Phd2 also had smaller adipocytes, less WAT inflammation, and better glucose tolerance, and did not develop insulin resistance when fed with high-fat diet (HFD) or aged.33 Moreover, they had lowered serum cholesterol levels and an improved high density lipoprotein (HDL)/low density lipoprotein (LDL) + very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) cholesterol ratio and were protected against steatohepatitis.33 The molecular-level determinants of the phenotype were upregulation of the HIF-1α target Glut1 and Glut4 mRNAs, several enzymes of glycolysis and Pdk1 mRNA in several tissues, downregulation of some inflammatory mRNAs in WAT and upregulation of the insulin sensitivity increasing, HIF2α target Irs2 mRNA and the concomitant downregulation of the lipogenesis regulating Srebp1c mRNA and its downstream targets Fas, Acca, and Scd1 in the liver.33,34 Mice deficient for Phd2 in adipose tissue also showed resistance to HFD-induced obesity and had a better glucose tolerance.35 In another study, knockout of Phd2 in adipocytes blunted lipolysis and increased intracellular lipid storages, therefore reducing ectopic lipid deposition.36 When wild-type mice were treated with a pharmacological PHD inhibitor FG-4497, obesity and metabolic syndrome opposing phenotype was observed.33 In support of these data, clinical trials with two different PHD inhibitors, FG-4592 (Roxadustat) and GSK1278863, for the treatment of anemia and peripheral vascular disease, respectively, report lowered serum cholesterol levels and an improved HDL/LDL profile with the subjects treated with the inhibitors.37,38 Dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome predispose to atherosclerosis. Recent data from mice associate inhibition of PHDs 1 and 2 with protection against atherosclerosis.34,39 The mechanisms involved were HIF-mediated modifications to metabolism including that for cholesterol, reduced inflammation, and beneficial alterations to the immune system.34,39 Although metabolic syndrome and the connected diseases are highly associated with life style only a minority of patients succeed in its improvement and end up in medication. Recent data provide evidence for justification to explore PHD inhibitors and activation of the endogenous hypoxia response pathway, to treat obesity, metabolic dysfunction, and atherosclerosis.
      
      
        Role on musculoskeletal system
        Prof J Myllyharju presented another example of the physiological role of the hypoxia pathway, related to the regulation of extracellular matrix homeostasis.40 The presentation focused on the roles of collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylases (C-P4Hs) and lysyl oxidase (LOX) in the musculoskeletal system. Indeed, HIF induces the expression of several key enzymes such as CP4Hs, lysyl hydroxylases, and LOX that are required for proper collagen synthesis and assembly, and hence correct structure and function of connective tissues.41,42 Remodeling of extracellular matrix by these collagen-modifying enzymes has recently been shown to be important in hypoxic cancer metastasis.43,44 C-P4Hs are essential enzymes for collagen synthesis as the modifications catalyzed by these enzymes are required for thermal stability of collagens at body temperature. The C-P4H family consists of three isoenzymes, C-P4Hs I and II being the major forms.41 CP4H-I is expressed ubiquitously, whereas C-P4H-II has a more restricted expression pattern, being a prominent form in for example chondrocytes and osteoblasts.41 It has been shown that HIF-1α-regulated induction of C-P4Hs is necessary for sufficient collagen production in a hypoxic tissue environment such as, for example, in the cartilage chondrocytes.45 Studies with gene-modified mice lines have shown that c-P4h-1−/−mice die during early embryogenesis because of nonfunctional assembly of collagen IV into basement membranes.46 Reduced C-P4H activity in c-P4h-1+/−/c-P4h-2−/−double mutant mice leads to several connective tissue abnormalities. These include abnormal development of cartilage and bone resulting in structural and biomechanical impairment of these tissues and chondrodysplasia.47 Similar, but much milder abnormalities are present in the c-P4h-2−/−single mutant mice.47 As no signs of uncompensated endoplasmic reticulum stress were observed in these mice, the main cause of the chondrodysplasia is likely to be aberrant mechanosensing and signaling cues mediated by the abnormal extracellular matrix.47 Another collagen-modifying enzyme highly induced by HIF is LOX that catalyzes crosslink formation in collagen fibrils and elastin and affects the maturation, turnover, and stiffness of connective tissue.42 LOX is the major isoenzyme of the LOX family.42 It has been shown that lack of LOX interferes with the development of several connective tissues resulting in dysfunction of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, aortic aneurysms, and perinatal lethality in mouse.48,49 Interestingly, it has been shown recently that muscle composition is regulated by a LOX–TGFβ feedback loop. Lack of LOX was found to lead to excess expression of TGFβ that disrupts the balance between the amounts of myofibers and that of muscle connective tissue.50 This results in short and small muscles with reduced amount of myofibers and abnormal muscle patterning.50 Remarkably, this abnormal muscle development could be rescued by TGFβ inhibition.50 The regulatory effect of LOX on TGFβ signaling may be explained by either direct interaction between LOX and TGFβ or its receptor and/or increased susceptibility of insufficiently crosslinked collagens and elastin to proteolysis, which could result in elevated liberation of TGFβ from the extracellular matrix reservoir of the Lox−/− tissue.50
      
    
    
      Hypoxia pathway in pathology and therapies
      The meeting dedicated a session to the pathological aspect of hypoxia. The oxygen-sensing pathway may be dysregulated with a consequent constitutive activation of HIF transcription factors and target genes expression as observed, for example, in many types of tumors. The hypoxia pathway participates and sometimes initiates progression of a vast majority of tumors. The causes of HIF stabilization are wide-ranging, from a chronic hypoxic microenvironment to mutations in direct key regulator genes. The causes may also be indirect with the inhibition of hydroxylases by the production of 2-OG mimetics (following mutations in metabolic enzymes) or by oxidation (modification of the redox status, oxidation of co-factors, etc).
      
        Example of chondrosarcoma
        Prof J Bovée presented chondrosarcomas as an example of tumors linked to hypoxia. Chondrosarcoma is the second most frequent primary bone malignancy, predominantly affecting adults. They usually arise from their benign precursor lesions: 1) peripheral chondrosarcoma arising in osteochondroma (at the surface of bone, with mutations in exostosin genes EXT1 or EXT2 encoding glycosyltransferases involved in heparan sulphate biosynthesis) and 2) central chondrosarcoma arising in enchondroma (in the medulla of bone, with mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase genes IDH1 or IDH2). The prognosis is strongly correlated with histological grading. Grade I chondrosarcoma, now reclassified as an atypical cartilaginous tumor, is poorly vascularized, behaves locally aggressive, but typically does not metastasize. High-grade chondrosarcomas (grades II and III) have an increased vascularity and increased metastases corresponding to poor patient survival. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment. If the tumor location is non-resectable or metastatic, there is still no curative treatment.51,52 Chondrosarcoma is notorious for its primary resistance to conventional chemo- and radiotherapy. 51,53 A multistep genetic model has been devised: while specific mutations (IDH, EXT) cause the benign precursor lesions, high-grade chondrosarcomas have complex karyotypes54 with many additional mutations.50 Since cartilaginous tissue as well as chondrosarcomas has a hypoxic microenvironment,55 it has been hypothesized that hypoxia is involved in chondrosarcoma aggressiveness, and this is supported by the increased microvessel density, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and HIF-1α levels in high-grade chondrosarcoma as compared to low grade.56,57 Interestingly, mutations in the IDH genes are found in up to 80% of enchondromas and ~50% of chondrosarcomas. IDH is involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Mutations in IDH lead to the formation of a neoenzyme that catalyzes the reduction of 2-OG to D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D2HG),58 which is considered an oncometabolite and inhibits some α ketoglutarate dependent oxygenases. Regarding the effect of D2HG on prolyl hydroxylase and HIF pathway, mutations in IDH were first shown to associate with stabilization of HIF-1α,59 but later it was shown that D2HG produced by these mutations is not a potent PHD inhibitor.60,61 An inhibitory effect of D2HG has been demonstrated on the dioxygenase tenelevan-translocation-2 (TET2),62 a dioxygenase that catalyzes hydroxylation of methylated DNA. This results in inhibition of DNA demethylation, causing hypermethylation,62,63 and altered histone60 that impacts tumor progression.
      
      
        Example of Mn porphyrin-based redoxactive drugs as anticancer therapeutics
        Some aspects of anticancer therapies have been presented during the meeting. Notably, Prof I Batinic-Haberle focused on manganese (Mn) porphyrin-based superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimics as anticancer therapeutics. Porphyrins are molecules that comprise the active site of numerous key enzymes (hemoglobin, myoglobin, prolyl hydroxylase, cyt P450 oxidases, nitric oxide synthases, oxygenases, etc). These enzymes contain macrocyclic protoporphyrin ring that encapsulates iron and affords extreme stability to iron complex.
        Batinic-Haberle, Spasojevic, Tovmasyan, and other collaborators have developed very stable and redox-active manganese porphyrins (MnPs) as powerful mimics of superoxide dismutase (SOD) family of enzymes.64–66 They have mimicked the nature in its use of iron protoporphyrin as active site of different proteins to run major metabolic functions such as oxygen transport and detoxification among those. Yet, instead of protoporphyrin bound to iron, MnP-based SOD mimics have N-substituted pyridylporphyrins bound to manganese. MnPs exhibit remarkable ability to protect normal tissue from radiation (RT)-induced damage, such as brain, salivary glands, mouth mucosa, colon, eye, prostate, hematopoietic stem cells, and lung. Moreover, MnPs are powerful tumor radio-and chemosensitizers as demonstrated with lymphoma and tumors of brain, breast, head and neck, ovary, and prostate. Based on differential properties of MnPs to protect normal while killing cancerous tissues, two lead compounds, MnTE-2-PyP5+ and MnTnBuOE-2-PyP5+, progressed to Phase I/II clinical trials, the latter at Duke University.
        MnPs as mimics of superoxide family of enzymes also react with numerous other reactive species (RS) such as peroxynitrite (ONOO−), nitric oxide (.NO), and hypochlorite (ClO−) (reviewed in64–66). The actions of MnPs are also H2O2-driven and are frequently coupled with cellular reductants such as ascorbate, glutathione (GSH), and protein thiols. Although they have insignificant catalase-like activity, MnPs possess GSH peroxidase and thiol oxidase-like activities. The magnitude of all actions of MnPs thus far studied, including SOD-like activity, parallels the magnitude of their therapeutic efficacies and is dependent upon the metal-centered reduction potential of MnIIIP/MnIIP redox couple; in turn the magnitude of those actions parallels each other. In addition to reacting with different RS, MnPs inhibit activities of several transcription factors, such as HIF-1α, NF-κB, AP-1, SP-1, and Nrf2, thereby affecting cellular apoptotic and proliferative pathways.64–66 The nature of such interactions has mostly been explored with respect to NF-κB and has been ascribed to MnP-catalyzed and H2O2/GSH-driven oxidation/S-glutathionylation of thiols in its p50 and p65 subunits. Preliminary data also indicate the major role of Nrf2 in the actions of MnPs.
        MnPs exhibit differential effects to normal and tumor tissues presumably by impacting NFκB/HIF-1α/Nrf2 pathways.64–66 The HIF and NF-κB pathways are closely related. Hypoxia contributes to the development of inflammation, at least in part through the activation and/or potentiation of NF-κB, a master regulator of genes involved in innate immunity, inflammation, and apoptosis.67,68 The differential effects of MnPs on these pathways arise from different redox environments and diverse accumulation of MnPs in those tissues. In normal cells/tissues, MnPs reduce inflammation. For example, in a rat pulmonary radioprotection study, MnPs suppressed RT-induced lung inflammation through the inhibition of HIF-1α activation and downregulation of its target gene VEGF, which seemed to be controlled by NF-κB.69,70
        The cancer cell, though, relative to the normal cell, has excessive levels of endogenous H2O2, and thereby is often under oxidative stress and sensitive to any further increase in oxidative stress. This is due to its perturbed redox environment, often with increased MnSOD levels but insufficient levels and/or activities of peroxide-removing enzymes.64–66 Such situation has been heavily exploited in anticancer therapies, one of which includes MnP alone and/or combined with exogenously imposed oxidative stress. MnP, when administered at high concentration, exhibited an anticancer effect in its own right in a 4T1 breast cancer mouse model,71 where large inhibition of HIF-1α activity (presumably orchestrated through oxidation and subsequent inactivation of NF-kB) contributed to the suppression of angiogenesis. In the same model, the anticancer effect of MnP was further enhanced when it was given jointly with exogenous sources of H2O2 – RT, chemotherapy, or ascorbate.64 Furthermore, the massive MnP/H2O2/GSH-driven suppression of anti-apoptotic NF-κB was demonstrated in a cellular lymphoma model where lymphoma cells were exposed to MnP and dexamethasone.69,72 In addition, complexes I and III of mitochondrial respiration were S-glutathionylated, and in turn inactivated, resulting in the loss of ATP.
        The excessive tumor H2O2 levels, along with up to 10-fold higher accumulation of MnPs in tumor than in normal tissue73 – as major reactants in a process of S-gluthathionylation – drive higher tumor yield of NF-κB oxidation relative to normal tissue. Consequently, apoptotic processes are favored in the tumor, whereas a suppression of inflammation occurs in normal tissue (Figure 2).66
        Drugs, commonly known as antioxidants/vitamins, such as ascorbate, tocopherols, and carotenoids, have been tested in clinical trials as single anticancer drugs with only marginal effect. The lack of effect is still not fully understood. Batinic-Haberle et al have contributed recently to the understanding of why that maybe so.63,73 In order to affect cancer cell metabolism, the redox active drug needs to inhibit anti-apoptotic pathways. It seems that such inhibition does not happen primarily by removing RS, as thought for a long while, but instead by using RS to oxidize signaling protein cysteines. The major function of ascorbate under physiological conditions is to protect tocopherol; it cycles with oxidized tocopherol radical thereby regenerating tocopherol. Yet at higher levels, achieved if added exogenously, ascorbate cycling with endogenous metal complexes (such as cyt P450 oxidases) will result in a large production of cytotoxic H2O2, which in turn will oxidize and inactivate thiols of critical cellular proteins (such as NF-κB and complexes I and III of mitochondrial respiration). In turn, tumor growth may be moderately suppressed. Yet, a massive anticancer effect could be achieved with increased yield of protein oxidation, when additional source(s) of H2O2 (RT and chemotherapy) and/or catalyst, optimized for ascorbate oxidation (such as MnTE-2-PyP5+ or MnTnBuOE-2PyP5+), are applied (Figure 2).69,72–74
      
    
    
      Conclusion
      This meeting covered large themes of the hypoxia field and highlighted the complexity of the oxygen sensing pathway. It opened discussion about perspectives to better understand its role in physiology and disease occurrence and to specifically target it for therapies.
    
  
        Long non-coding RNAs are involved with development and progression of cancer, and the advance of microarray technology allows the researchers to investigate the complete expression profile of lncRNA in various kinds of sample. We enrolled 5 male primary HCC cases with chronic HBV infection and the HCC and normal tissues have been obtained during the resection surgery. After total RNA extraction, the lncRNA microarray analysis was conducted to determine the lncRNA and mRNA expression signals. 612 lncRNAs and 1,064 mRNAs were significantly up-regulated in HCC tissue while 656 lncRNAs and 1,532 mRNAs were down-regulated in HCC tissues. Compared with normal tissues, XLOC_007433 (fold change: 12.80) and AC144449.1 (fold change: 27.20) were the most over- and under-expressed lncRNAs in HCC tissues. As for the mRNA, THBS4 (fold change:41.13) and CXCL14 (fold change: 58.03) were the most over- and under-expressed mRNAs in HCC tissues when comparing with their normal counterparts. In total, 4,552 pairs of lncRNA-mRNA were identified and the co-expression network was constructed. Moreover, the gene ontology enrichment analysis showed that the significantly different transcript between HCC and normal tissues were mainly associated with response to wounding, inflammatory response, protein hetrodimerization activity, response to stress which involved with biological process and molecular function. The pathway analysis suggested that the most significant pathways consisted of alcoholism, regulatory RNA pathways and RNA polymerase transcription. Several novel differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs were identified in the present study.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the one of the most fatal among all kinds of cancer, roughly the fatality reached 0.95. The early detection and surgical resection would help to improve the outcome with a 5 year overall survival of 39% approximately [1]. However, most of HCC cases are not discovered and treated until the advanced stage or severe symptoms occurred. Due to the degenerated liver function, distant metastasis, and possible cirrhosis, liver resection is only available for less than 30% of HCC cases [2]. Even if some local therapies of HCC were introduced, including ethanol ablation, radiation therapy, and transcatheter aterial chemoembolization, the 5 year overall survival for HCC cases with any stage is only about 15% [3]. Therefore, it is of great importance to identify the risk factors of HCC and provide scientific evidence for cancer prevention. With decades of efforts, chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection [4], hepatitis C virus infection [5], excessive consumption of alcohol [6], and aflatoxin exposure [7] were generally acknowledged as the risk factors of HCC. Particular in China, the HBV infection rate is about 7.18% in general population [8], and the high incidence of HCC in China can be attributed to the high infection rate. A large number of chronic HBV patients in China would continue to progress and possibly developed to cirrhosis and even HCC. The high incidence, high fatality and poor outcome combined together placed heave burden to both the patients' family and healthcare system of China.
      Currently, the onset of HCC is thought to be a complicated process involved with multiple factors, including environmental factors, viral infection and genetic susceptibility. Furthermore, the statistics indicated that approximately 3%-8% of chronic HBV cases would progress to HCC eventually [9], which suggested that the mutations on HBV genome [10] and the genetic variation on human genome would alter the HCC risk together. Recently, researchers have shown an increased interest in investigating the association between long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) profile and the onset of cancer [11]. Advances in RNA sequencing technologies have discovered the existence of non-coding RNAs which comprised the majority of the transcriptome. By definition, lncRNA refers to the large and diverse class of transcribed RNA with a length of more than 200 nucleotides that lacks protein-coding potential [12]. LncRNA has been proved to possess multiple properties, including regulation of gene transcription, chromatin modification, and epigenetic regulation [13]. Growing evidence demonstrated that thousands of lncRNAs with aberrant expression are associated with different kinds of cancer, including HCC [14]. Previous study conducted among three male HCC cases has revealed that 8 lncRNAs were differentially expressed when comparing the HCC tissues with adjacent normal counterparts [15]. Such approach with remarkable findings, however, sample size was relatively small and HBsAg status among the enrolled subjects were not limited, and has failed to address the different expression profile properly. It is generally acknowledged that the HBV-induced HCC involves the integration of HBV fragment and hepatocellular genome, immune response caused chronic and persistent inflammation, which would definitely express different profile when comparing with non-HBV induced HCC. Xiamen ranks the third position in HCC prevalence with 49.57/100,000 [16], according to the cancer statistics released by China National Cancer Center. High chronic HBV infection rate in general population which was 13.79% leads to the high prevalence of HCC [17]. Moreover, comparing with national average level above mentioned, the HBV prevalence in Xiamen population was almost one fold higher. In this study, we attempted to investigate the expression profile on lncRNA among 5 male HBV induced HCC cases by using microarray analysis, thus we can provide scientific evidence for the male individuals with chronic HBV infection which have been identified as the high risk population of HCC.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of 5 HCC cases
        5 male HCC cases with chronic HBV infection undergone liver resection have been enrolled in our study between November 2015 to January 2016. The tissue samples have been acquired during operation in accordance with the procedures stated in materials and methods section. The demographic and clinical characteristics of enrolled 5 subjects were demonstrated in Table 1. As can be seen, the average age was 42.8 years, and the average duration of HBV infection was 12.6 years. The average tumor size was 5.86 cm, and 3 subjects have AFP level higher than 400 ng/ml. As for the liver function parameters, 3 subjects showed elevated AST level, and 4 have higher AST level when comparing with reference range, but only 1 subject showed elevated total bilirubin level.
        
          Table 1
          
            Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics
          
          
            
              
                Subject ID
                1
                2
                3
                4
                5
                Average
              
            
            
              
                Age (Year)
                39
                34
                37
                36
                68
                42.8
              
              
                Duration of HBV infection(Year)
                15
                12
                15
                11
                10
                12.6
              
              
                Tumor Size(cm)
                6.3
                5
                10
                3
                5
                5.86
              
              
                AFP (ng/ml)
                125718
                4.74
                5652
                4.33
                10979
                28471.61
              
              
                ALT(U/L)
                30.4
                91
                33
                53.5
                43
                50.18
              
              
                AST(U/L)
                45.9
                53
                99
                26.2
                60
                56.82
              
              
                Total bilirubin(μmol/L)
                14.3
                7.5
                4.6
                13.8
                17.2
                11.48
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Overview of the lncRNA and mRNA expression profile in HCC and normal tissues
        In total, 15,328 lncRNAs and 21,717 mRNAs were found to be differentially expressed when comparing the HCC tissues and normal tissues in 5 enrolled subjects. Of these above mentioned RNAs, 612 lncRNAs and 1,064 mRNAs were significantly up-regulated (≥2 fold change and no less than 3 biological replicates) in HCC tissue while 656 lncRNAs and1,532 mRNAs were down-regulated in HCC tissues. Compared with normal tissues, XLOC_007433 (fold change: 12.80) and AC144449.1 (fold change: 27.20) were the most over- and under-expressed lncRNAs in HCC tissues. As for the mRNA, we found that THBS4 (fold change:41.13) and CXCL14 (fold change: 58.03) were the most over- and under-expressed mRNAs in HCC tissues when comparing with their normal counterparts. The scatter plot of differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs was demonstrated in Figure 1 and the volcano plot was showed in Figure 2.
        
          Figure 1
          
            The scatter plot of A. lncRNA and B. mRNA expression signals in HCC and normal tissues.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 2
          
            The volcano plot of A. lncRNA and B. mRNA expression signals in HCC and normal tissues.
          
          
        
        Based on the expression level of all tested RNAs in microarray analysis, we performed a hierarchical clustering analysis to group lncRNAs and mRNAs, allowing us to hypothesize the relationship among samples. The denodrogram in Figure 3 demonstrated the relationships of the lncRNA expression profiles between HCC tissues and normal tissue (Figure 3A) and mRNA expression profiles were showed in Figure 3B.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Heat maps of differential expression and hierarchical clustering of A. lncRNA and B. mRNA in HCC and normal tissues.
          
          
        
      
      
        Classification of differentially expressed LncRNAs
        We further classified the 612 over-expressed lncRNAs and 656 down-regulated lncRNAs in accordance with their different features, including genome location and context, exerted effect on DNA, and functioning and targeting mechanisms. The detailed results were showed in Table 2 and Figure 4. As can be seen, we found that 112 up-regulated and 153 down-regulated sense lncRNAs in the comparison of expression profile between cancerous and normal tissues. As for antisense lncRNAs, 150 were up-regulated and 133 were down-regulated. The profiling data also suggested 103 divergent lncRNAs were up-regulated while 30 were down-regulated. 215 intergenic lncRNAs were over expressed and 268 were under expressed. Furthermore, we identified 32 up-regulated intronic lncRNAs and 72 down-regulated, respectively.
        
          Table 2
          
            Classification of differentially expressed lncRNAs in comparing HCC tissues and normal tissue
          
          
            
              
                lncRNA Classification
                Up-regulated
                Down-regulated
                Total
              
            
            
              
                Sense lncRNA
                112
                153
                265
              
              
                Antisense lncRNA
                150
                133
                283
              
              
                Divergent lncRNA
                103
                30
                133
              
              
                Intergenic lncRNA
                215
                268
                483
              
              
                Intronic lncRNA
                32
                72
                104
              
              
                Total
                612
                656
                1268
              
            
          
        
        
          Figure 4
          
            The classification of differentially expressed lncRNAs in HCC and normal tissues
          
          
        
      
      
        Construction of lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network
        In order to investigate the correlation between differentially expressed lncRNA and mRNA, the lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network was constructed based on the correlation analysis and only those gene pairs with an absolute value of Pearson correlation coefficients not less than 0.99 were included. In total, 4,552 pairs of lncRNA-mRNA were identified in accordance with above mentioned criteria. We further selected the top 1000 among all significant correlations to draw the co-expression network (See Figure 5). The network suggested that one mRNA can be correlated with several lncRNAs and vice versa, however, we did not observe significant cluster by visual inspection. In particular, the most over-express lncRNA XLOC_007433 were positively correlated with the expression of HLA-DQB1, CFD, MSR1, LPAR5, GRAP2 and MBNL2, while inversely associated with MAP3K13 and MBNL2. The correlation analysis found no mRNA was correlated with the most under-expressed lncRNA AC144449.1. The most up-regulated coding gene THBS4 was correlated with 2 lncRNAs, namely uc.77- and ENSG00000249042.1. As for the CXCL14 which has been identified as the most down-regulated gene, only ENSG00000232593.2 was inversely correlated with the expression of it.
        
          Figure 5
          
            The lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network in Top 1000 correlated pairs
          
          
        
      
      
        Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis results
        GO analysis was conducted among all differentially expressed mRNAs to identify the function of coding transcripts. Through the analysis we revealed that the significantly different transcript between HCC and normal tissues were mainly associated response to wounding (GO:0009611), inflammatory response (GO:0006954), protein hetrodimerization activity (GO:0046982), response to stress (GO:0006950) which involved with biological process and molecular function, and the detailed results were presented in Figure 6. Moreover, we found that cellular process (GO: biological process), localization (GO: biological process), extracellular matrix (GO: cellular component), and extracellular region complex (GO: cellular component) were the most enriched terms (See Figure 7). The pathway analysis suggested that the most significant pathways consisted of alcoholism (hsa05034), regulatory RNA pathways (REACT_12472) and RNA polymerase transcription (REACT_1309) and the detailed result of pathway analysis was showed in Figure 8.
        
          Figure 6
          
            GO enrichment analysis of differentially expressed of mRNA
          
          
        
        
          Figure 7
          
            GO analysis of level 2 function of differentially expressed of mRNA
          
          
        
        
          Figure 8
          
            Pathway analysis of differentially expressed of mRNA
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      As reported by the previous studies, the incidence of HCC in male population was about 3 times higher when comparing with female counterparts in global range [18]. The gender difference in HCC incidence could partly attribute to the higher prevalence of excessive alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking in men. But more importantly, male population is prone to infect with HBV or HCV by sexual transmission or blood transmission, therefore, combined these evidences together, male individuals aged 45-65 have been identified as the high risk population of HCC. Given the high prevalence of chronic HBV infection in China, especially in the male population without the protection of universal HBV vaccination program, it is of great importance to investigate the underlying genetic mechanism of HCC among this high risk population. To achieve that, we enrolled 5 male HCC cases with chronic HBV infection and performed the lncRNA microarray analysis in cancerous and normal tissue and bioinformatics were conducted to analyze the data.
      Chronic HBV infection would possibly lead to the onset of HCC, and the underlying mechanism of it is different from those caused by other carcinogens, for instance, aflatoxin and alcohol. The major feature of HBV infection is the integration into host genome, and the integration can both be found in HCC tissue [19] and non-tumor tissue [20] from chronic HBV-infected patients. The random integration event has been acknowledged as the risk factor of developing HCC, because it is capable of disrupting cellular gene expression which is important for cellular growth and differentiation. A study revealed that the gene disruption, viral promoter-driven human transcription, DNA fusion and copy number alteration near the integration sites [21], indicating that the gene expression can be altered by HBV infection and consequently elevating the HCC risk. In our present study, we identified that 1,676 lncRNAs and 2,596 mRNAs were differentially expressed when comparing the HCC tissues with the normal counterparts. Unlike gene coding RNAs, lncRNAs are generally expressed in very low level, and the expression prolife of lncRNA in cancer development is specific [22]. Considering the large number of differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs we identified in our samples, we can assume that the HBV-induced carcinogenesis is involved with the altered expression of various kinds of lncRNA and mRNA.
      Surprisingly, both the most over and under expressed lncRNAs have not yet been associated with any cancer in reviewing previous researches, however, we did observe the positive correlation between XLOC_007433 which is the most over-expressed in HCC tissues and HLA-DQB1.It is generally acknowledged that human leukocyte antigens (HLA) involved with defending viral infection and carcinogenesis. Our study examined the mRNA expression signal and found that the HLA-DQB1 was significantly lower in HCC tissue. Although the HLA-DQB1 has been found to be associated with some cancers, however, the precise role of it has not yet been identified, a recent meta-analysis suggested that the variations occurred in HLA-DQB1 were related with the risk of HCC after pooling all available data [23]. These findings could partly support our assumption that among the chronic HBV carriers with compromised immunity, the chance of developing HCC is higher.
      As for the gene coding RNAs, one unanticipated finding was that THBS4 is the most up-regulated gene in HCC tissues. Generally speaking, THBS4 belongs to the thrombospondin protein family which involved in diverse biologic processes given their potential to bind numerous proteins and serve as interaction platforms in the extracellular matrix [24]. The elevation of THBS4 expression in HCC tissue was firstly reported according to our data, however, its expression has been associated with the invasion of breast cancer previously, and the evidence suggested that elevated THBS4 expression contributes to the activated stromal response exhibited during tumor progression and this may facilitate invasion of tumor cells [25]. Although no previous publication supports the role of THBS4 in HCC development, it is worth to investigate the underlying mechanism between THBS4 and HCC, for the expression of THBS4can be up-regulated in tissue injury, remodeling, immune response and inflammation. CXCL14 is a novel chemokine, and mainly stimulating cell migration that involved with immune surveillance, inflammation and cancer [26]. Our finding is consistent with the results of an animal experiment which suggested that CXCL14 was significantly suppressed in HCC tissues of mice in vivo, moreover, CXCL14 has been proved to be a tumor suppressor and capable of inducing tumor cell apoptosis through both the mitochondrial and nuclear apoptosis pathway [27]. A case-control study involved with 361 HBV-related HCC cases and 407 healthy controls also supports our finding, it has been revealed that the polymorphism in CXCL14 was associated with the HCC progression, suggesting that CXCL14 might alter the disease development by inhibiting tumor growth [28]. Hence it could conceivably be hypothesized that CXCL14 could be an important tumor suppressor in HBV-related HCC, and investigation on the underlying mechanism should be conducted.
      GO and pathway analysis showed that differentially expressed mRNAs are mainly involved with wounding, inflammatory response, protein hetrodimerization activity and response to stress. The results may be explained by the fact that viral protein generates inflammatory environment within the liver, and reactive oxygen species resulting oxidative stress causes widespread hepatic cell damage [29]. This also accords with our earlier observations, which showed that the alteration of global Th1/Th2-like cytokine expression was observed in metastatic HCC tissues when comparing with non- metastatic tissues, suggesting that inflammatory response is capable of promoting HCC metastasis [30].
      Overall, we investigated the lncRNA and mRNA expression profile which are related to the onset of HCC in male chronic HBV subjects, and several novel differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs were identified by using microarray analysis. Further research is necessary to reveal the molecular mechanism and biological function of lcnRNAs in HBV-related HCC.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Sample collection and RNA extraction
        This study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University. All subjects enrolled were physically signed the written consent before sample collection. Samples were acquired from 5 eligible HCC cases following these criteria: (1) pathologically diagnosed with primary HCC (ICD9-155); (2) male; (3) chronic HBV infection confirmed by ELISA prior to the onset of HCC; (4)permanent residents who lived in Xiamen over 10 years and aging from 20 to 79 years. Patients were excluded if any of the following conditions were met:(1) liver disease due to parasitosis, diabetes, fatty liver, metabolism disorders or severe cardiovascular diseases; (2) presence of cancers other than HCC; (3) autoimmune hepatitis or toxic hepatitis; (4) refuse to participate. Tissues acquired from 5 eligible HCC cases were divided into following two groups: primary HCC tissues (CA) and normal tissue distant from tumor edge for 5cm (NT). In total, 10 tissue samples were acquired during the liver resection and placed in liquid nitrogen pre-freezing RNase-free vial for 5 min, and stored at −78°C prior to RNA extraction. Tissue samples were subjected to RNA extraction using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, MA, USA). The purity and concentration of RNA were measured from OD260/280 readings using a NanoDrop ND-1000, and the integrity was assessed using standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Only RNA extracts with total volume higher than 8μg undergone further analysis.
      
      
        Microarray analysis
        The paired cancer and normal samples used to synthesize double stranded complementary DNA (cDNA), and the cDNA product was labeled and hybridized to lncRNA + mRNA Human Gene Expression Microarray V4.0 (CaptialBio Corp, Beijing, China) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The microarray we used contains 40,916 human lncRNAs probes and 34,235 mRNA probes, and 4,974 Agilent control probes. Each RNA was detected by corresponding probes repeated for two times.
      
      
        Microarray imaging and data analysis
        The data generated from lncRNA + mRNA microarray was analyzed for data summarization, normalization and quality control by using GeneSpring software version 12.0 (Agilent, CA, USA). In order to identify the differentially expressed genes, we employed threshold values of ≥2 fold change and a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected P value of ≤0.05. The data was log 2 transformed and median centered by genes using Adjust Data function of Multiexperiment Viewer software (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, MA, USA). Further analysis, such as hierarchical clustering with average linkages was performed. Treeview software (Stanford University, CA, USA) composed by Java was employed to visualize the microarray results.
      
      
        Correlation analysis between lncRNA and mRNA
        The network between lncRNA and mRNA was constructed based on the correlation analysis among differentially expressed lncRNA and mRNA. For each pair of genes, a Pearson correlation was estimated and the pairs with an absolute value of Pearson correlation coefficients not less than 0.99 were selected to draw the network by using Cytoscape. In network analysis, yellow node represents the lncRNA and green node represents the mRNA. Red lines indicate a positive correlation, and blue lines indicate an inverse correlation.
      
      
        GO and pathway analysis
        GO analysis provides three structured networks of defined terms that describe gene product properties, including biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. Differentially expressed mRNAs between HCC tissue and normal tissue were included in GO term enrichment and pathway analysis based on the latest KEGG database. This analysis enabled us to identify the biological pathways for differentially expressed mRNAs in acquired samples.
      
    
  
        The dependence of cancer on overexpressed c-MYC and its predisposition for polyploidy represents a double puzzle. We address this conundrum by cross-species transcription analysis of c-MYC interacting genes in polyploid vs. diploid tissues and cells, including human vs. mouse heart, mouse vs. human liver and purified 4n vs. 2n mouse decidua cells. Gene-by-gene transcriptome comparison and principal component analysis indicated that c-MYC interactants are significantly overrepresented among ploidy-associated genes. Protein interaction networks and gene module analysis revealed that the most upregulated genes relate to growth, stress response, proliferation, stemness and unicellularity, as well as to the pathways of cancer supported by MAPK and RAS coordinated pathways. A surprising feature was the up-regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) modules embodied by the N-cadherin pathway and EMT regulators from SNAIL and TWIST families. Metabolic pathway analysis also revealed the EMT-linked features, such as global proteome remodeling, oxidative stress, DNA repair and Warburg-like energy metabolism. Genes associated with apoptosis, immunity, energy demand and tumour suppression were mostly down-regulated. Noteworthy, despite the association between polyploidy and ample features of cancer, polyploidy does not trigger it. Possibly it occurs because normal polyploidy does not go that far in embryonalisation and linked genome destabilisation. In general, the analysis of polyploid transcriptome explained the evolutionary relation of c-MYC and polyploidy to cancer.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      c-MYC is a potent, highly conserved transcription factor that interacts with at least several thousands of genes [1]. c-MYC can be considered as a pleiotropic sensor, integrating multiple cellular signals and mediating a transcriptional response that drives cell stress, growth/proliferation, and apoptosis. Activation of c-MYC transcription is an end-point for a broad range of signal-transduction pathways [2]. A link between c-MYC and initiation and maintenance of a wide range of neoplasms is well documented (for reviews, see [3–6]). However, c-MYC (and other members of its family) is rarely mutated in cancers but is activated by gene amplification or translocation, and the resulting abundance of c-MYC activity leads to cellular immortality associated with blockade of differentiation [2, 3]. c-MYC was discovered to act in synergy with another powerful oncogene, mutated (and constitutively active) RAS as a complementary pair in experimental murine tumors [7]. A tumor may critically depend on the activated c-MYC so that switching it off, as shown in transgenic mouse models, causes tumour regression. This phenomenon has been termed “oncogene addiction” [8]. c-MYC is also one of the Yamanaka factors used for induction of pluripotency in somatic cells (iPSC) [9].
      In addition to having a large number of direct transcriptional targets, c-MYC is also a global amplifier of transcription [10] due to a wide range of secondary targets, resulting in a global increase in absolute cellular abundance of mRNAs [11]. It also causes chromatin remodeling to promote the more open conformation [8]. Importanly, overexpressed c-MYC causes endopolyploidy by decoupling DNA synthesis and mitosis [12].
      Although somatic polyploidy (endopolyploidy) is normally encountered in a few normal mammalian tissues (liver, brain, vascular smooth muscle cells, heart, megakaryocytes, and placenta) [13–19], most solid tumours of any origin develop polyploidy and aneuploidy correlating with poor prognosis [20–27]. The tight association of malignancy with aneuploidy is a surprising fact in view of its essentially anti-proliferative effect [28–31]. Polyploidy came recently into the focus of cancer research because it can be induced in malignant cells (mostly with mutated TP53) by genotoxic agents. The reversed (de-polyploidised within one-three weeks) cells can serve as the origin of clonogenic recovery and resistance to anti-tumor drugs [14, 20, 25, 32, 33].
      Because of this intricate relationship between c-MYC, polyploidy and neoplasia, we analysed the c-MYC interacting genes in normal polyploid cells to seek an answer for these two questions: (1) which properties of c-MYC that confer normal polyploidy may explain its function in promoting cancer and resistance to anticancer agents? (2) why normal polyploid cells are not tumorous and how they maintain normalcy? To this end, we analysed c-MYC-interacted genes associated with polyploidy from the available complete transcriptomes of liver, heart and placenta in mouse and human.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Polyploidy induces c-MYC interacting genes in heart, liver and placenta
        To expose the evolutionary conserved ploidy-related functions among MYC-interacting genes, we compared the MYC interactomes (protein-protein interactions) in heart, liver and decidua cells. We took advantage of the patterns of pairwise reciprocal polyploid versus diploid organ comparison: human heart vs. mouse heart and mouse liver vs. human liver. The average nuclear ploidy in human liver is 2.05±0.008 n, whereas in mouse liver it is 5.47±0.1 n, and the average nuclear ploidy in mouse heart is 2.05±0.007 n, whereas in human heart it is 4.04±0.05n [34, 35]. Thus, human hepatocytes and mouse cardiomyocytes have predominantly diploid nuclei, whereas human cardiomyocytes and mouse hepatocytes have predominantly polyploid nuclei. Other authors also showed the higher ploidy level of mouse hepatocytes compared to human hepatocytes [36, 37, 38] and human cardiomyocytes compared to mouse cardiomyocytes [39, 40]. This reciprocal comparison across tissues and species removes species and tissue-specific signals and thus reveals evolutionary conserved ploidy-specific effects on gene expression (see also MATERIAL & METHODS).
        The analysis was performed with three gene sets (as detailed in MATERIAL & METHODS): (1) the genes with common ploidy-associated change of expression in polyploid vs. diploid heart and liver and in tetraploid vs. diploid early mouse decidua cells (i.e. for three pair-wise comparisons); (2) the genes with similar direction of changes between polyploid vs. diploid heart and liver (i.e. for two pair-wise comparisons); (3) the genes with differential expression in tetraploid vs. diploid early mouse decidua cells (for one pair-wise comparison). Here we applied gene-by-gene and module-by-module comparisons. For better understanding of the functional relationships between genes, we constructed for these differentially expressed genes the corresponding protein interaction networks using the String database [1]. Finally, we verified the data on heart and liver obtained by NGS using the data obtained by microarrays [41].
        We obtained three ploidy-associated gene lists containing 200 genes with increased and 76 genes with decreased expression for polyploidy versus diploidy in heart, liver and placenta (Supplementary Table S1). The corresponding numbers are 467 and 186 for ploidy-associated genes if only heart and liver are considered (Supplementary Table S2), and 1401 and 727 gens for the comparison in the 4n vs 2n early mouse decidua cells (Supplementary Table S3). The lists of biological modules significantly enriched for ploidy-associated genes with regard to the entire genome (13327 genes) and simultaneously to all known c-MYC interactants with known orthologs in human and mouse (3734) are presented in Supplementary Tables S4–S6. Although we focus only on the common heart, liver and placenta traits, we present here the gene and module lists for three gene sets. As can be seen from the Supplementary Tables S4–S6, the majority of polyploidy-upregulated genes in all three tissues belong to the modules related to growth, stress response, proliferation and stemness, including WNT, Pi3K, Hippo, Hedgehog, FGF, FOXM and TGF-beta (Supplementary Tables S4–S6) as well as protooncogenes that are supported by the MAPK system and belong to the Ras-coordinated gene module. This finding suggests a link between polyploidy and activation of fetal program and is in good agreement with the experimental data obtained with somatic cells reporting the ploidy regulation by Hippo signaling [42–44]. The most surprising common ploidy-associated feature of all three gene lists was the manifestation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In addition, we found features of fetal phenotype within the corresponding metabolic configuration, including the Warburg's effect.
        Table 1 reports the genes with the strongest ploidy–associated regulation shared by the three data bases. It is evident that ploidy-associated genes include well-recognized major EMT regulators like SNAIL, BMP, N-cadherin as well as EMT metabolic marker stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) [45]. The distribution of EMT-related genes among various functional groups associated with development (BMP2, SNAI2, BMP7), extracellular matrix and adhesion (CDH2, FN1; MMP14), metabolism (SCD) and sress response (EPAS1) as well as good gene concordance for different data bases suggests that EMT – is a polyploidy inherent feature. Some genes related to mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) are also upregulated, including HGF, WNT2B and FGFR1 (Table 1) and a few epithelial markers (Supplementary Table S1–S3) were revealed, as well.
        
          Table 1
          
            Ploidy associated Myc interacting core gene list for human and mouse heart, liver and 4n/2n decidual cells shared by 3 data bases a,b
          
          
            
              
                
                Upregulated
                Downregulated
              
              
                in myc-associated polyploidy
                in myc-associated polyploidy
              
            
            
              
                Cell Cycle
                E2F8, CCNE1, CDKN2C, E2F5, CDK2, CCND3, LMNA,
                CAV1, MYO5A, RB1, PAK2, RBL2, ARHGEF7 CDC42EP1, TBC1D4,
              
              
                Growth and proliferation
                BCAR1, EGFR, FGFR1, GNL3L, MYC, TK1, TLE1, MAP2K2, MCC, MTA1, HGF (MET), HRAS, NR2F2, RNH1, TAF6, TCF21, TGFA, IGFBP2, IGF1, WEE1, UBTF
                RB1, PAK1; PAK2, RBL2
              
              
                Development
                WNT9B, GATA2, WNT2B (MET), AXIN2, DVL1, KIT, SNAI1 (EMT), BMP2 (EMT), FGFR1 (MET), SNAI2 (EMT), BMP7 (EMT),
                
              
              
                Matrix, cytoskeleton, and focal adhesion
                CTTN, SDC4, TUBG1, DSTN, FN1 (EMT), NCAM1, CDH2 (EMT), MMP14 (EMT),
                MEF2A, DSP, CYTH1, PLEK, MCMBP
              
              
                Glutamine metabolism
                GLS2, GCDH,
                
              
              
                Protein degradation
                PSMA7, PSMB5, PEX11a
                
              
              
                Ribosome
                RRS1, NOLC1
                
              
              
                Protein synthesis
                GCAT,
                
              
              
                Sugar metabolism
                PFKM, CA3, GNA11
                CA2
              
              
                Lipid metabolism
                LDLR, PCBD1, SCD (EMT)
                ALOX1
              
              
                Tumor supressors
                LATS1, TP53
                RB1; PAK2; RBL2
              
              
                DNA repair
                TP53BP2, BRCA1, H2AFX
                
              
              
                Oxidative stress
                EPAS1 (HIF2A) (EMT), PEX11, PEX16; HP
                HP
              
              
                Chromatin
                HDAC11
                
              
              
                Signaling
                
                NRIP1, TPST2, EXT1
              
              
                Apoptosis
                
                APAF1, BCL2L11, SYK, RB1, PAK, PAK2, RBL2 (p130)
              
              
                Immunity
                
                LCK, IL7, CD5, TNFSF13B, CD8A, CD22, NFATC2, IFIT2, MAML3, ZFAND5, HP
              
            
          
          
            
              a
              Genes were obtained with databases [27, 32, 33]
            
            
              b
              Gene functional categories have been chosen according to the GO classifications of the enrichment tools in String Data Base [1]. Genes may be present in more than one category.
            
            (EMT) marks genes that were previously characterised as being induced or repressed, respectively, in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the literature [34].
            (MET) genes that were previously characterised as being induced or repressed, respectively at mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the literature [35]
          
        
      
      
        c-MYC and nucleostemin (GNL3L) demonstrate gene dosage exceeding induction in rodent tetraploid vs diploid hepatocytes
        Cross-species and cross-tissue analysis of the c-MYC interacting genes revealed a higher c-MYC expression per genome in polyploid compared to diploid tissues and cells (Table 1, Supplementary Table S1). In particular, we found manifestation of stemness and induction of well-established stem-cell marker and direct target of c-MYC nucleostemin (GNL3L), which is normally not expressed in adult tissues [46, 47]. To confirm this finding, we carried out an immunocytochemical study of c-MYC and GNL3 protein content in polyploid vs. diploid hepatocytes of adult mice. We found that for both c-MYC and GNL3L protein content per genome is significantly higher in tetraploid cell nuclei than in diploid ones (in other words, it is higher than a gene dose). Interestingly, in octaploid nuclei the increased protein content per genome was not further elevated (Figure 1A, 1B). Similar results were obtained with adult rat livers (not shown). The characteristic elongated nuclei of Kupffer cells (liver macrophages) seen among hepatocytes served us as internal negative control for both proteins. Expression of c-MYC and GLN3L was confirmed by RT-PCR (Figure 1C). Our results suggest that cross-species data can be used to infer the intra-species relationships and that transition from diploidy to tetraploidy confers the cells the new properies linked to stemness and proliferative potential, which are not simply the result of increased gene dosage indicating to the change in transcription profile.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Immunofluorescent and RT-PCR study of polyploid versus diploid hepatocytes in mice
            A. Mouse hepatocytes were fixed and stained for c-Myc and nucleostemin (GNL3L) in combination with DAPI; B. Immunofluorescence image cytometry analysis showed that c-Myc and GNL3L protein content per genome is significantly higher in tetraploid cell nuclei as compared with diploid and C. RT-PCR performed with two different primer pairs, confirms expression of c-Myc and GLN3: 35, 40: PCR cycles number.
          
          
        
      
      
        Principal component analysis (PCA) identifies ploidy-associated conserved features: the significance of c-MYC
        The main effects of c-MYC transcriptional regulatory activity are promotion of cell proliferation, embryonal programs, carbohydrate metabolism and protein synthesis [48, 49]. An important direct effect of c-MYC overexpression is the disconnection of DNA synthesis from mitosis, which results in polyploidy [12].
        We next provide evidence for a potential function of c-MYC in polyploidy using a purely data-driven a posteriori approach. This strategy is based on the finding of enrichment of c-MYC interactants among the genes with significant scores (> 2SD) in the principal component axis related to ploidy. In addition to confirming of c-MYC involvement in ploidy, the approach gives global metabolic characterization of ploidy. Table 2 presents the loading pattern and the percentage of explained variability of the principal components of the heart-liver data set. PCA shows a clear hierarchical order of relevance in terms of explained variation and consequently of the associated biological factor:
        
          Table 2
          
            Loading pattern for heart and liver
          
          
            
              
                
                PC1
                PC2
                PC3
                PC4
              
            
            
              
                HS*_heart
                0.691
                0.529
                −0.390
                −0.301
              
              
                HS_liver
                0.690
                −0.539
                −0.366
                0.313
              
              
                MM**_heart
                0.650
                0.583
                0.394
                0.286
              
              
                MM_liver
                0.670
                −0.556
                0.398
                −0.290
              
            
          
          
            
              *
              Human;
            
            
              **
              Mouse
            
          
        
        PC1 (45.6% of total variance) corresponds to Shared Variability: more-to-less expressed genes independent of species, tissue and ploidy (all the variables enter PC1 with loadings of the same sign). This component probably reflects the ‘house-keeping’ gene fraction, which can be considered a ‘size’ component [50].
        PC2 (30.5% of total variance): corresponds to Tissue-Effect: heart and liver samples enter the component with opposite loadings; PC2 is thus a ‘shape’ component [50] linked to the differential profiles of the two tissues. High values of component scores point to genes with higher expression in the heart than in the liver, while the opposite holds for low component scores (note that the loadings correspond to the correlation coefficients between variables and components).
        PC3 (15% of total variance): corresponds to Species-Effect: mouse and human samples enter PC2 with opposite loadings irrespective of the tissue type. High values of component scores correspond to genes whose level of expression is higher in mice than in humans, while the opposite holds for low values of components.
        PC4 (9% of total variance): corresponds to Ploidy-Effect: polyploid samples (HS heart and MM liver variables) have negative loadings on PC4 while diploid samples (MM heart and HS liver) show positive loadings. This implies that high component scores correspond to genes whose expression is suppressed by polyploidy condition, while low component scores correspond to genes whose expression level is increased by polyploidy as such.
        It is worth noting that the fourth component could in principle only represent the ‘noise’ component given we have an initially four dimension space. So we checked for the non-gaussian (and consequently non-noisy) character of PC4. The signal character of PC4 was confirmed by its huge Kurtosis value (502.04 to be compared to the value of 3 typical of normal distribution) pointing to the fact the by far the major portion of PC4 variance was accounted for few outlier genes. The soundness of 2SD threshold was confirmed by the fact the 99% percentile of PC4 distribution (that has by construction 0-mean and unit standard deviation) is at 1.38SD (another proof of concept of its non-gaussian character).
        The result shows that polyploidy does not exert dramatic effect on transcriptome and accounts for only about 10% of variability in the human vs. mouse heart as well as in the mouse vs. human liver. PCA results are in agreement with generally accepted notion that the effects of polyploidy are weak and unique because of gene dosage compensation for the majority of genes [51]. At the same time, PCA revealed a minor albeit significant pure ‘polyploidy-related’ component independent of both species and tissue–linked effects.
        Notably, we extracted four components starting by an initially four-dimensional system; this implies that we applied PCA as a pure geometrical transformation corresponding to the rotation of the initial data set into a basis set spanned by mutually orthogonal axes (components) with no loss of information. The hierarchical character of component extraction (the components are numbered in decreasing order of variance explained) reflects the relative importance of shared (house-keeping genes), tissue, species and ploidy effects. The expression value of each gene can be comprised as a summation over the four components. Given that each component has by construction zero mean and unit standard deviation over the whole set of genes we can consider the genes having a PC4 score exceeding 2 SD (in a module) as the genes exceeding the 95% confidence interval with respect to PC4 and thus, ‘significantly’ contributing to the PC4 ploidy component [52]. To investigate whether PCA revealed ploidy associated genes (we considered genes having a score > 2 SD in a module) are enriched for c-MYC interactome, we extracted c-MYC interactants from the String database [1]. After that, we matched them to all 13327 human-mouse orthologous genes. Overall, we obtained 3327 genes, which make up a proportion of 0.24 of all orthologous genes. Using binomial test for comparison of this proportion to the proportions of c-MYC interactants among significantly ploidy-induced genes, 0.408 (55 of 134), and ploidy-inhibited genes, 0.5010 (50 of 98) (Supplementary Tables S7 and S8) show a p-value < 0.000005 for the difference between 0.24 and 0.408 and p< 0.0000001, for the difference between 0.24 and 0.501, respectively.
        Figures 2A and 2B present the MYC-interacting gene distribution in PC1 of PCA space, with the 2 and 3 Standard Deviations lines on PC4 shown. The strong coherence between two completely different statistical paradigms of selection (PCA does not explicitly encompass ploidy in the algorithm being only based on the between profiles mutual correlations) offers a proof-of-concept of the robustness of the obtained results. This coherence allows us further sketch the functional description of c-MYC interactants. We base our analysis on values of genes scoring in PC4 higher than three SDs together with the major known ploidy-regulator genes with a lower than 2 SD PC4 scores.
        
          Figure 2
          
            PCA revealed ploidy-associated genes in c-Myc interactome of heart-liver A. and placenta B. Genes demonstrating the most pronounced variation with ploidy are indicated by enlarged symbols
            Symbol colours represent gene functions as listed in legend. In both, heart-liver (A) and in placenta (B) polyploidy is associated with the induction of developmental markers and genes related to protein synthesis, oxidative stress response and sugar metabolism. Genes related to aerobic respiration are mainly repressed. Purple lines mark 2SD and 3SD.
          
          
        
        In this way, we found that C-MYC interacting genes with substantial ploidy variation participate in cytoskeleton maintenance, growth, ATP reservation, energy metabolism and oxidative stress protection (Figure 2A, Supplementary Table S7). GO categories and KEGG pathways enriched in ploidy-associated genes with more than 2 SD expression difference between polyploid/diploid organs and cells (Supplementary Table S8) relate to oxidative and xenobiotic stress response, protein synthesis and processes related to single cell organisms.
        To identify ‘ploidy-related’ effect on gene expression in purified diploid and tetraploid mouse decidua cells, we applied the same geometrical approach.
        In this case, we have a bidimensional initial data set corresponding to two expression vectors of diploid and tetraploid cells (See Supplementary Table S9). The complete PCA solution gives rise to a two components space spanned by a pre-dominant shared variation axis (size component, correspondent to the cell developmental differentiation attractor state) in which diploid and polyploid tissues are loaded with the same sign and a minor ‘ploidy’ component encompassing the divergent expressions between the two conditions (the two vectors enter with opposite loading). Table 3 shows the correspondent loading pattern:
        
          Table 3
          
            Loading pattern for decidua cells
          
          
            
              
                
                PC1
                PC2
              
            
            
              
                Diploid
                0.981
                0.193
              
              
                Tetraploid
                0.981
                −0.193
              
            
          
        
        As expected, PC1 explains the major part of variability (96.3%), it shows the existence of a very strong and invariant ‘tissue attractor’ correspondent to the specific placental expression profile (see for example [53]), while ploidy related PC2 accounts for a minor portion of expression variation (3.7%).
        Nevertheless, such minor variation allows for the identification of some relevant genes: in Supplementary Table S9 the ‘relevant’ gene expressions (higher than 2 or lower than −2 SD units) introduce in function-related evidence. Consistently with the loading signs, (see Supplementary Table S9) positive values of the component correspond to genes whose expression is higher in diploid state, while negative values correspond to genes whose expression is higher for polyploid tissues. Figure 2B presents this situation. X- axis corresponds to the PC1 shared variation and Y axis to ploidy factor, two lines are set at the 2 SD thresholds.
        To examine whether c-MYC interactants are significantly over-represented among the genes of decidua cells revealed by PCA as tetraploidy related, we matched them to all 22020 genes of this set. The obtained 3845 genes comprised 0.19 of all genes. Then, like for heart and liver, we compared this proportion to the proportions of c-MYC interactants among significantly ploidy-induced genes 0.348 (152 of 436) and ploidy-inhibited genes 0.292 (242 of 828) using binomial test. The results show a near zero p-value (p<10−24) for the difference between 0.19 and 0.348 and a p-value = 7.79821E-13 for the difference between 0.19 and 0.29.
        To present briefly the ploidy-related effects revealed by PCA in early mouse decidua, we describe the up- and down-regulated c-MYC interactants with the most prominent expression difference between diploid and tetraploid cells. We also specified the most important biological regulators demonstrating significant variation with ploidy. Gene function description is in Supplementary Table S9. Finally, Figure 3 shows the MYC-interacting gene distribution in PC1-PC4 space for polyploidy effects of three tissues with lines indicating 2 and 3 Standard Deviations on PC4. We also provide below a brief functional description of the c-MYC interactants displaying more than 3 SD and several principal biological regulators with lower than 3 SD but significant ploidy-regulation.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Common ploidy associated changes in gene functional module groups for heart-liver and 4n/2n decidua cells revealed by PCA
            X axis - average gene number in a module group. Y axis - module functional group names. Figures at the bottom of the bars indicate module number in a functional group. Small vertical bar divides figure for heart-liver and for 4n/2n decidua cells. White and grey squares reflect geometrical mean for q values of module functional group enrichment significance with regard to all Myc targets (white squares) and with regard to all orthologs (grey squares). Bars with no squares have q-value not less than 0.15 with regard to all Myc targets and not less than 0.05 with regard to all orthologs. Module groups confirmed by gene-by-gene analysis are marked with brown diamonds.
          
          
        
        The analysis of biological modules enriched in ploidy-associated genes in heart, liver and in decidua cells using PCA (Figure 3) indicates that polyploidy activates a response to oxidative stress, DNA repair, and modules related to cancer, thus suggesting that genome duplication enhances oncogenic proclivity. As well, we found clear manifestations of the fetal program significant for cancer [54] including the induction of modules related to single cell organisms, protein synthesis and modules regulating sugar and lipid metabolism. In accordance with oncogenic and fetal traits, modules of apoptosis and immunity are inhibited (Figure 3). Modules of transport show the downregulation of cytomembrane transport and upregulation of vesicular transport. This modification is in agreement with ploidy related decrease of cell surface to volume ratio and with its compensation by active vesicular transport [21–23]. Importantly, practically all changes revealed by the PCA module groups are in a good agreement with gene cross-species comparison. These modules are marked in Figure 3 with brown diamonds.
        In summary, PCA of gene expression profiles in heart-liver and 4n/2n decidua cells revealed the following biological features of gene expression programs associated with polyploidy: response to oxidative and xenobiotic stress, embryonality, apoptosis impairment, the shift to anaerobic and ATP saving type of energy production, and induction of modules related to single cell organisms.
      
      
        Ploidy associated protein interaction networks reveal synergetic activation of regulome, embryonic features, and stress response
        Modules and protein interaction networks can offer a link between genes and biological functions, thus consitute a key step in connecting genotype and phenotype [55]. Therefore, we next constructed protein interaction networks encoded by the genes positively and negatively related with polyploidy with a high stringency for interaction (>0.9). Such 'ploidy induced' network containing clusters of c-MYC, p53, cell cycle, WNT, HRAS, IGF signaling, nucleoli and extracellular matrix is presented in Figure 4A. The protein network of 'ploidy-repressed' genes presented in Figure 4B contains clusters of inflammation, lipid metabolism, tumor suppression, and apoptosis. As can be readily seen, the induced network contains more transcription factors, multifunctional regulators and growth factors (E2f 4, 5, 7, 8, SNAI1, 2, TWIST1, HRAS, c-KIT, c-MYC, GATA2, TP53; WNT6, 2B, 9B, BMP2, 7, IGF1, EGF, EGFR, HGF, FGFR1) than the ploidy-inhibited network (RB1, PAK1, PAK2, PAK7, MEF2a, c, APAF1). Accordingly, GO biological processes and KEGG pathways in the polyploidy-induced network are related to cancer, metabolism, cell cycle, stem cell pathways (Pi3K, Hippo, Hedgehog, WNT), EMT and MET pathways and stress response (Figure 4A), while again, the pathways of apoptosis, cell death, inflammation and cytoskeleton with Rho signaling elements are inhibited (Figure 4B). To find out whether the association between polyploidy and c-MYC is reciprocal, we also analysed the types of molecular interactions for the networks depicted at Figure 4A and 4B using server String. Our data indicate that polyploidy influences several genes targeting c-MYC via direct binding (Figure 4A and 4B). The ploidy-activated genes include c-MYC inducer YY1 [56], oncogene MYB [57], and E2F4 which retards c-MYC increased proliferation via negative feedback loop in the mitotic restriction (R) point [58]. The genes inhibited by ploidy are also presented by c-MYC suppressors RB1 [59] and PAK2 [60, 61]. At the same time, it is established that c-MYC overexpression uncouples DNA replication from mitosis completion causing polyploidy as such [12, 62, 63] and our study of cell cycle regulating genes confirmed it (see below). The causal relationship between the overexpressed c-MYC and normal polyploidy was clearly confirmed in mouse hepatocytes where overexpressed or underexpressed c-MYC correspondingly accelerated or retarded developmental polyploidization [64, 65]. So, in general the data suggests that the programmed overexpression of c-MYC causing developmental polyploidy is also under some feedback control by it.
        
          Figure 4
          
            The most connected components of protein interaction networks of significantly ploidy- induced A. and ploidy-inhibited B. genes in the c-Myc interactome of heart, liver and placenta revealed by gene-by-gene cross-species comparisons of human and mouse heart and liver and 4n/2n mouse decidua cells
            Large symbols show genes with more than two-fold expression differences between polyploid vs diploid organs and cells. Brown and blue arrows show direct c-MYC inductors and inhibitors that were determined with the use of String Server (molecular interaction type option). Clustering was performed by MCL algorithm with the use of the same server. qMyc presents q value for GO biological processes and KEGG pathways enrichment of tested gene sample compared to all c-Myc interactants.
          
          
        
        To investigate the data obtained from the bird's eye in more details, we performed the manual data curation and analysis of gene modules related to specific functions briefly described below.
      
      
        Cell cycle regulation reveals polyploidy-associated proliferation potential
        Polyploid hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes were reported arising via aborted (polyploidising) mitoses (reaching ploidies 4-8C, rarer 16-32C) [17, 37, 66]. Our data are fully in agreement with these observations (Figures 4A, 5, 6 and Supplementary Table S4–S6). They reveal features of G1-S induction (Cyclines A1, E1, D3, CDK2, 8, MCM8, TK1, POLA1, PARP1, REV3), metaphase entry (AURKA1 activation), polyploidization (E2F7, 8), and cytokinesis omission (inhibited Rho signalling and cytoskeleton elements ARHGEF28 and ARHGEF7, CDC42EP1, MTM1, MYO5A, MYO3B) coupled to senescence suppression (inhibited PAK1, 2, 7). Thus, we confirm that normal polyploid cells originated by aborted cytokinesis represent in fact a reservoir for cell division and growth [17, 66].
        
          Figure 5
          
            Proliferation and growth related modules significantly enriched in ploidy-regulated genes
            X axis - average gene number in a module group. Y axis - module functional groups. Figures at the bottom of the bars indicate module number in a functional group. Small horizonatl bar divides the figures for heart-liver, for decidua cells and for heart, liver and decidua cells. Red and white arrows reflect geometrical mean for q values of module functional group enrichment significance with regard to all Myc targets (red arrows) and with regard to all orthologs (white arrows). Bars with no squares have q -value not less than 0.15 with regard to all Myc targets and not less than 0.05 regarding all orthologs.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 6
          
            Ploidy-associated changes in the activity of regulators related to cell cycle
            X- gene names; Y-average expression for heart-liver and placenta±SE. Bars of light colors correspond to p<0.0001; Bars of dark colors correspond to p<0.01. This chart shows the increased activity of cell cycle regulators related to G1-S transition (CCNA1, E1, D3, F; CDK2, 8; E2F4, 5,) S-phase (POLA1, PARP1, REV3L, MCM8, TK), polyploidization (E2F7, 8) G2-M genes (AURKA1) and decreased activity of genes involved in cytokinesis (ARHGEF28, ARHGEF7, CDC42EP1, MTM1, MYO5A, MYO3B, RIPK7, CAV1) and tumor supressors (RB1, RBL2, PAK1, PAK2).
          
          
        
        
          Figure 7
          
            Development and stemness modules significantly enriched for ploidy-regulated genes from all three c-Myc interacting gene lists (for heart-liver, placenta and heart-liver-placenta)
            Designations for X, Y, figures at the bottom of the bars, red and white arrows pointing to the tips of the bars, bars with no arrows and red diamonds are the same as for Figure 5. This chart indicates that polyploidy is linked with metabolism activation and modification. This chart demonstrates common nature of ploidy-related stemness and the induction of epithelial-to -mesenchymal transition. The stemness is seen from the upregulation of modules related to stem cell and signaling by PI3K, NOTCH, HIPPO, FGF, FOXO/FOXM WNT, TGF-beta, c-MYC, Hedgehog. Activated epithelial-to -mesenchymal transition is evident from the activated EMT module.
          
          
        
      
      
        c-MYC activation of the ancient Wnt and TGF-beta pathways is associated with the EMT-featured properties of polyploidy
        Our data in all three gene lists show a clear transcriptional activation of GO modules related to Wnt pathways playing a prominent role in controlling cell fate decisions during embryonic development (Supplementary Tables S4–S6, Figures 4A, 7, 8). As well, the genes involved in Wnt pathways regulation were clearly ploidy-upregulated and form a tight subnetwork (Figure 4A). In concordance, we identified the induction of WNT cross-regulated pathways related to transformation (IGF, mTOR, HGF, RAS, E2F (Figures 7, 8) and stemmness (the pathways related to pluripotency, stem cell biology, and Hedgehog, NOTCH, PI3K, FGF, Hippo and TGF- pathways) (Figure 7, Supplementary Tables S4–S6).
        
          Figure 8
          
            Ploidy-associated regulators of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and pluripotency
            X- gene names; Y-average expession for heart-liver and placenta±SE. Bars of light colors correspond to p<0.0001; Bars of dark colors correspond to p<0.01. This chart shows the increased activity of principal regulators related to selfrenewal (A) and EMT (B) increasing ploidy proclivity for transformation.
          
          
        
        Our observation of an increased activity of WNT-TGF beta signaling is in a good agreement with the general activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (TWIST1, SNAI1, SNAI2, VCL, TGFA, FN1 (Fibronectin) and CDH2 (N-Cadherin) (Figures 4A, 8, Table 1, Supplementary Tables S1–S3).
        All these facts suggest that c-MYC-related activation of the WNT/TGF beta pathways is a key component of the ploidy-associated network with the tumour-like properties including stemness and EMT. At the same time, coordinated induction of EMT– related genes is coexisting in all three gene lists with a few genes participating in MET that reverse EMT and with some epithethelial markers (Supplementary Tables S1–S3).
      
      
        c-MYC-associated common metabolic profiles of polyploid cells from heart, liver and placenta
        Ploidy-related changes in macromolecule metabolism show enhanced transcription activity, ribogenesis, highly dynamic protein turnover, global proteome remodeling and activated lipid metabolism.
        The metabolic genes and gene modules demonstrating similar ploidy-associated changes in heart, liver and early mouse decidua are presented in Supplementary Tables S1–S6 and in Figure 9. The main functions of the upregulated gene modules are positive regulation of protein metabolic process related to protein transport and phosphorylation. These findings suggest that the proteomic landscape of polyploid cells is very active and differs from that of diploid cells. The upregulation of the phosphate- and phosphorus-related metabolic modules, which are also involved in protein modification and/or cellular signaling regulation, is in agreement with the notion of a global and dynamic proteome remodeling of polyploid cells (Supplementary Tables S3–S5).
        
          Figure 9
          
            A. Metabolism related modules significantly enriched in ploidy-regulated genes from all three c-Myc interacting gene lists (for heart-liver, placenta and heart-liver-placenta). Designations for X, Y, figures at the bottom of the bars, red and white arrows pointing to the tips of the bars, bars with no arrows and red diamonds are the same as for Figure 5. This chart indicates that polyploidy is linked to metabolism activation and modification. Specifically, it outlines the boosting of various branches of protein metabolism and transport, induction of sugar metabolism and insulin signaling and the switch of the lipid metabolism from biosynthesis to decomposition. This switch is seen from impaired modules of lipid binding and storage and induced modules related to phospholipase, Acyl-CoA metabolism and PPAR gamma modules. B. Ploidy-associated metabolic regulators common for heart-liver and placenta. X- gene names; Y-average expession for heart-liver and placenta±SE. Bars of light colors correspond to p<0.0001; Bars of dark colors correspond to p<0.01. This chart shows the increased activity of sugar and protein metabolism inherent for increased activity of growth processes.
          
          
        
        This highly dynamic proteomic profile implies both protein degradation and synthesis. Therefore, our data highlights a specific upregulation of genes involved in the lysosomal and proteasomal protein degradation (Supplementary Tables S1–S6) and the upregulation of mTOR pathway (Figure 5, Supplementary Tables S4–S6) that enhances translation efficiency and ribosomal biogenesis [67].
        In addition, a switch of lipid metabolism from biosynthesis to decomposition was revealed from impaired modules of lipid binding and storage and induced modules related to phospholipase, Acyl-CoA metabolism, and PPAR gamma modules. This result is in agreement with the recent data by Edmunds and colleagues [68] evidencing increase of fatty acid utilization by c-MYC activation.
        All this shows the highly dynamic features of polyploid cells showing enhanced transcription, ribogenesis, protein turnover, and lipid metabolism.
        Stress response: DNA synthesis and repair machinery, cellular detoxification, protection against oxidative stress and protein glycosylation
        Our data indicate that polyploidy is associated with adaptation to stress. This is evident from the activated pathways crosstalk and general transcriptome elevation (Supplementary Tables S1–S6; Figures 10, 11). The increase of the genome dynamic is seen from the prevalence of induced genes and gene modules over inhibited ones (Supplementary Tables S1–S6; Figures 10, 11) and from a larger (having larger number of connected genes) protein-protein interaction network for the induced genes than for the inhibited ones (Figure 4). Notably, in accordance with the transcriptome activation, all clusters presented in the network on Figure 4 are by 40-90% composed of the genes implicated in stress response (besides their basic functions). Among various stress-related branches, the highest significance of induction (confirmed by PCA) is exposed by the genes involved in DNA repair, oxidative stress and cancer (Figures 3, 10, 11).
        
          Figure 10
          
            Stress response and transformation related modules significantly enriched in ploidy-regulated genes from all three c-Myc interacting gene lists in all three comparisons (for heart-liver, placenta and heart-liver-placenta)
            Designations for X, Y axes, figures at the bottom of the bars, red and white arrows pointing to the tips of the bars, bars with no arrows and red diamonds, and the method of data obtaining are the same as at Fig 5. This chart demonstrates coordinated induction of module groups related to stress, DNA repair and transformation (cancer-related module group and module groups of c-Myc, RAS and MAPK) and the down-regulation of module groups related to apoptosis and immunity.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 11
          
            Ploidy-associated changes of master regulators activity invoved in DNA repair, oxidative stress, apoptosis and immunity common for heart-liver and placenta
            X- gene names; Y-average expession for heart-liver and placenta±SE. Bars of light colors correspond to p<0.0001; bars of dark colors correspond to p<0.01. This chart demonstrates a combination of induced stress response and suppressed apoptosis and immunity that may increase the risk of cell transformation.
          
          
        
        Other upregulated genes are involved in detoxification and protection of cells from the oxidative stress induced during catabolism of amino acids and carbohydrates, such as ALDH9A1, CA3 and PIM3. Notably, an increased aldehyde dehydrogenase activity, along with an increased expression of c-MYC and activation of the WNT/β-catenin, is a feature of cancer stem cells [69].
        We also observed an enhancement in the expression of glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 1 (GFPT1), the gene involved in the channeling of glucose flux into hexosamine pathways. Notably, the global protein glycosylation level has been reported being increased upon c-MYC activation and elevated in cancer cells [70].
        Interestingly, the response to apoptosis and immune-related modules were coordinately downregulated (Figures 3, 10, 11), in line with the data on protein network presented in Figures 4B.
        Glycolysis and glutaminolysis are the main sources of carbon and energy
        Polyploid cells supporting highly biosynthetic metabolism need a source of energy and carbon supply to provide ATP and building blocks for DNA and protein synthesis. Notably, the c-MYC oncogene was found as playing a major role as a central organizer of the metabolic changes, which occur in transformed cells [12, 49].
        Our transcriptional metabolic analysis discloses that the main nutrients used by polyploid cells seem to be carbohydrates and aminoacids. Thus, we observed an enhancement of the levels of expression of the enzymes and modules involved in glucose, fructose and mannose and glutamine metabolism (Figure 9, Supplementary Tables S4–S6, S9 and S10), also known as a characteristic feature of cancer cells. In heart and liver this is combined with down-regulation of oxidative phosphorylation (Warburg effect), while mitochondrial respiration is high in placenta.
        As a summary of metabolome analysis, we conclude that the c-MYC-related metabolism of polyploid cells shows elevated protein turnover (synthesis and degradation) that employs carbohydrates and aminoacids as carbon and energy source. Thus, these polyploid cells not only express several EMT markers but also present the EMT-consistent metabolic features.
      
      
        RAS – a complementary partner of c-MYC for oncogenesis is enhanced and creates a hub in the polyploidy activated c-MYC interacting genes
        Studies on collaboration of two powerful oncogenes, c-MYC and RAS, have provided one of the basic concepts of carcinogenesis occurring in two steps ‘immortalisation/initiation” (amplified c-MYC) and transformation/promotion (mutated RAS) [7]. However, the complementation of c-MYC and RAS, which is sufficient and effective for full carcinogenesis as found in early studies still remains poorly understood [71, 72]. Therefore, up-regulation of the oncogenic module of MYC/RAS in polyploidy associated network deserves particular attention (Figure 4A).
        Both oncogenes are linked to stress response (first of all by JUN and FOS, AP-1 complex with c-MYC) via conservative MAPK pathway and they directly activate and stabilize each other [54]. More recent studies show that both RAS and c-MYC are most often induced from EGFR by EGF and TGFα (found here induced by polyploidy 6-, 4- and 2-fold, correspondingly) and converge on Cyclin D/Cdk2 (also induced) activating proliferation, where immortality may be supported by c-Myc [65].
        In view of the carcinogenic potential of MYC/RAS complementary pair revealed here in normal polyploidy cells, we undertook a more detailed study of the c-MYC related tumour suppressor TP53 interacting genes.
      
      
        TP53 and malignancy traits
        The tumor suppressor TP53 is a central coordinator of the adaptive cellular response to stress conditions that facilitates repair and survival of damaged cells or eliminates severely damaged cells [73–75], and most importantly, it is a main barrier of cells to cancer [54]. TP53 is enhanced in all three polyploid tissues, however only slightly (16%), while the down-stream CDKN1A/p21CIP1 (with its positive feedback to p53) is not activated, in spite of the up-regulation of the DNA damage response genes (Supplementary Table S1, Figure 4A). Suppression of senescence, apoptosis, and the relatively modest upregulation of p53 may suggest a lowered barrier of polyploidy cells to genome instability and malignancy. Moreover, c-MYC overexpression can compromise and override some of the TP53-dependent responses activated by cellular stress changing thereby the global cellular effects of TP53 activation [76]. In turn, tetraploidisation of cancer cells surpasses the effect of downregulation of p53 in their diploid conterparts as judged by survival in response to oxidative stress [77].
      
      
        Summary of results
        We conclude that c-MYC- related polyploidy favours the expression of cellular programs of malignancy-related pathways (TGFb/WNT, BMP/WNT-embryonality, EMT, stress response, DNA synthesis and repair, Warburg-type energy supply, and activation of complementary proto-oncogenes). The c-MYC related metabolome of polyploid cells supports stress response and energy saving pathways coupled to EMT (Figure 12).
        
          Figure 12
          
            The scheme illustrates the main features of polyploidy-associated Myc interacting genes upregulation
            The upregulation of EMT and stemness master regulators as well as metabolic switch to glycolisis and glutaminolysis and enhanced protein synthesis and stress response pathways may suggest that polyploidy increases addiction to transformtaion.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution (T. Dobzhansky)
      
        c-MYC-related attraction of polyploidy to cancer represents an evolutionary toolkit for adaptation to stress
        We have undertaken this research to address two questions: (1) which properties of c-MYC confers polyploidy that may explain its role in promoting cancer; (2) why normal polyploid cells are not tumorous. Upregulation of c-MYC in polyploid cells of mammalian tissues has already been reported [12, 65], however c-MYC-interaction gene and protein network in polyploid cells have not been systematically analysed at a genome scale. PCA approach applied in our study, firstly, confirmed the fidelity of main results obtained by cross-species reciprocal comparison summarised above and, secondly, highlighted its evolutionary aspect. The found features of c-MYC related polyploidy, such as enhanced DNA repair, replication, and development, illustrate the adaptive and driving role of polyploidy in evolution, confirmed by mutual pathways with the whole genome duplications [78–80]. These adaptive features can explain 'addiction' of polyploidy to cancer. Moreover, PCA clearly exposed a single-cell organism module addressing origin of somatic polyploidy to the transition period from unicellular to multicellular organisms, which has occurred about 600 mln years ago [81, 82]. Segregation of germ and soma, division of labour, and gastrulation (movement of cell masses with EMT as its component [46]) were the first acquisitions of early multicellularians
        Therefore, it is worth noting that the c-MYC related TGFβ/Wnt pathways interacting with genes of the EMT program found here as playing a central role for normal somatic polyploidy are activated in embryogenesis from the gastrulation stage on. Thus, we revealed that normal differentiated cells developmentally polyploidised through abortive mitosis by c-MYC overexpression [12, 64, 65] become also embryonalised and stress-responsive by it. Obviously, by origin this program represents an evolutionary toolkit for adaptation to stress. These evolutionary traits of transient polyploidy linked to embryonalisation and exploiting c-MYC likely became usurped by cancer cells [83–87] conferring them resistance to treatments coupled with proliferative and metastatic potential. It appears that adaptive advantage of tetraploidy trades off the proliferative disadvantage of inevitable aneuploidy, explaining the “aneuploidy paradox” in cancer cells. Interestingly, studies by Duncan and colleagues showed that tetraploid mouse hepatocytes, when isolated and cultured display, contrary to wild type possessing normal karyotype in ~99% of cells, a high proportion of chromosome missegregations [37, 88]. Thus, in very stressful conditions, the genome of normally polyploid hepatocytes is prone to instability. In turn, genome instability as such promotes tumorigenicity [89]. Therefore, by all reasons, killing preneoplastic tetraploid cells is a useful strategy for cancer chemoprevention [90].
      
      
        However, why is normal polyploidy related to cancer but does not always cause cancer?
        The proclivity of c-MYC-polyploidy associated genes towards cancer contradicts the absence of active proliferation, genome instability, and cancer in these normal tissues. Notably, the shift towards embryonality of normal polyploid cells, which we have revealed and explored, remains in the developmental realm of gastrulation embryo. In spite of overexpressed c-MYC, which is tempered by wt TP53 and some negative feedbacks, it does not reach the pluripotent embryonal stem cell state (manifested by expressing OCT4/SOX2/NANOG associated programs) with their relaxed cell cycle checkpoints [91]. Such a state is often shared by aggressive primary cancers [92–95] and displayed by polyploidised cells of primary and established tumour cell lines resisting genotoxic stress [96–98]. The previously postulated cancer embryonic stem cell-like attractors [99–101] match between that of the two-cell embryo and that of onset of first lineage commitment [102]. As we have revealed here, physiological polyploidy in heart, liver, and placenta does not go that far in embryonalisation and genome destabilisation and therefore is separated from cancer.
      
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Data sources and pairwise cross-species comparative approach description
        To reveal the evolutionary conserved and thus functionally important effects of polyploidy on c-MYC regulated features, we investigated the activity of the c-MYC interacting genes in homologous tissues of mammalian species differing by ploidy and in polyploid vs diploid cells of the same tissue. The comparative cross-species and intra-species approach is instructive because evolutionary distance enhances the signals by helping to distinguish them from noise emanating from species- and tissue-specific effects [103]. The multi-level signal-to-noise filtration is particularly precautious for investigation of polyploidy because polyploidy may exert only weak and idiosyncratic effects on gene expression because of preserving gene-dosage balance [51].
        The approach of reciprocal cross-species comparison was developed and applied previously [34, 35, 104]. The data for the previous analysis were taken from Su et al. [105]. Since that time, the amount of annotated genes increased by more than 40% [1] and new bioinformatic approaches were developed, including the analysis of protein interactions. Altogether, these novelties allow us to step away from the conservative arbitrary 2–fold threshold for the expression difference that is appropriate only for analysis of strong effects and to accept the threshold of 15% that can be applied for evaluation of small fluctuations of gene expression [106, 107]. Finally, given that transcriptional regulators exhibit small expression amplitude, 15% expression difference may provide important information about the influence of polyploidy on transcription factors and chromatin regulators [106–108]. We performed the cross-species pairwise reciprocal comparison using the transcriptomic data for polyploid vs diploid organs, specifically, for human heart (polyploid) vs mouse heart (diploid) and mouse liver (polyploid) vs human liver (diploid). The transcriptomic data were from the database obtained from next generation sequencing (RNA-seq) by Brawand and colleagues, 2011 [109]. To increase the reliability of cross-species approach, we also analysed the genes selected from the microarray database [41] using the same cross-species reciprocal comparison algorithm. RNA-seq is more sensitive than microarrays [110], therefore the RNA-seq database was treated as a primary database, whereas the microarray data were considered as a secondary database providing additional support.
        To understand similarities in ploidy-associated gene regulation at the inter- and intra-species levels, we compared the results of the human and mouse heart and liver analysis with the results obtained for purified 4n and 2n cells of early mouse decidua taken from the microarrays database [111].
      
      
        Data normalization
        The analysis of RNA-seq data by Brawand and colleagues [109] was performed with the genes whose expression differed in the same direction with regard to ploidy in heart and in liver. In both comparisons the genes should have higher (or lower) expression in a polyploid tissue compared with a diploid tissue. Since we compared two different tissues in opposite directions in different species (human vs. mouse in the case of heart, and mouse vs. human in the case of liver), the effects of tissue-specificity and species-specificity were presumably removed. The same approach was applied for the microarray data by Wu and colleagues [41].
        The one-to-one human-mouse orthologous genes were obtained from the Homologene database [112]. The expression levels of orthologous genes were analyzed using the 'limma' package specially developed for revealing differentially expressed genes in whole-transcriptome analyses [113]. Comparison of different software packages showed that limma is the method of choice for goals similar to those pursued in our work [114]. It is especially valuable that limma allows analyzing in a similar way both RNA-seq and microarray data [113]. The data were normalized with quantile normalization implemented in limma and the differential gene expression (with its statistical significance) was determined on the ground of among-samples variation within each tissue within each species using the modified t-test implemented in limma. The intra-species analysis of 4n vs. 2n decidual mouse cell transcriptomes was performed similarly. These transcriptomes were from the work by of Ma and colleagues [111].
        Then, we selected the genes, which exhibited differential expression between polyploid and diploid tissues (cells) above 15%. As a result, we obtained three gene lists containing the genes that are common for heart, liver and decidua cells (Supplementary Table S1), for human heart and mouse liver (Supplementary Table S2), and for 4n vs. 2n early mouse decidua cells (Table 3). Then, these three gene lists were subjected to gene module enrichment analysis (see below the method description and Supplementary Tables S4, S5, S6).
        To identify genes with maximal ploidy association, we matched the genes that are common for heart-liver and decidua cells (Supplementary Table S1) (i.e. were obtained using the databases [109, 111] with the gene lists for human and mouse heart and liver obtained using the data bases [41]. The resulted gene list is presented in Table 1.
      
      
        Principal component analysis
        To find out, whether the results of cross-species gene-by-gene comparison can be confirmed by other bioinformatic approaches, we applied principal component analysis (PCA) to the raw data matrix having samples as variables and genes as statistical units.
        The idea is to confirm the gene-by-gene a priori approach with a data-driven strategy, letting a ‘ploidy’ specific principal component to emerge from the data. The principal components are orthogonal each other by construction, the data-driven emergence of a ‘pure ploidy component’ distinct from ‘tissue’ and ‘species’ components is equivalent to an unsupervised normalization for tissue and species effects. The genes endowed with extreme scores on such a ‘ploidy’ component are the ‘image in light’ of tissue and species independent ploidy effect on transcription pattern.
        For this propose we used microarray data [41] for human and mouse heart and liver. This approach enabled us to evaluate the impact of shared variable and species-specific, tissue-specific and ploidy-specific variables separately [52]. As a result, we obtained two lists of genes demonstrating statistically significant plody-asociated variation (not less 2 standard deviations) for human and mouse heart and liver (Supplementary Table S7) and for 4n/2n decidua cells (Supplementary Table S8). Then these gene lists were subject to gene module enrichment analysis and the modules that are regulated by ploidy in similar ways for heart-liver and placenta were identified (Supplementary Tables S9 and S10).
      
      
        Analysis of biological modules
        To find out which biological modules were over-represented among the ploidy-associated genes, we applied a double control. We tested the genes from all three data sets (Supplementary Tables S4–S6) with higher and lower expression in polyploid vs diploid tissues and cells, respectively, for enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) categories and molecular pathways with regard to all human-mouse orthologous genes (13965 genes) and simultaneously with regard to all known orthologous c-MYC – interacting genes (3734 genes). The enriched GO categories and molecular pathways were found using the hypergeometric distribution of probability (implemented in R package) as in the previous work [115, 116]. GO categories were taken from GO database [117]. For each GO category, all its subcategories were collected using Gene Ontology acyclic directed graphs, and a gene was regarded as belonging to a given category if it was mapped to any of its subcategories. As a source of molecular pathways, the NCBI BioSystems was used, which is a most complete compendium of molecular pathways from different databases [112]. The redundancy was removed by uniting entries with identical gene sets. The adjustment for multiple comparisons was done according to method by Storey and Tibshirani [118]. This procedure gives q-value, which can be considered as p-value corrected for multiple tests.
        Significance levels were set at p<0.01 and q<0.15. We choosed these thresholds on the ground of recommentations of GSEA group and other authors [119, 120]. Protein-protein interactions were taken from the STRING database [1].
      
      
        Immunofluorescent and RT-PCR study
        Immunofluorescent and RT-PCR study of polyploid versus diploid hepatocytes in adult IRC mice and Wistar rats were performed in three independent experiments. For details of the method, see Supplementary 1.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        nc886 is a recently identified cellular non-coding RNA and its depletion leads to acute cell death via PKR (Protein Kinase RNA-activated) activation. nc886 expression is increased in some malignancies, but silenced in others. However, the precise role of nc886/PKR is controversial: is it a tumor suppressor or an oncogene? In this study, we have clarified the role of nc886 in thyroid cancer by sequentially generating PKR knockout (KO) and PKR/nc886 double KO cell lines from Nthy-ori 3-1, a partially transformed thyroid cell line. Compared to the wildtype, PKR KO alone does not exhibit any significant phenotypic changes. However, nc886 KO cells are less proliferative, migratory, and invasive than their parental PKR KO cells. Importantly, the requirement of nc886 in tumor phenotypes is totally independent of PKR. In our microarray data, nc886 KO suppresses some genes whose elevated expression is associated with poor survival confirmed by data from total of 505 thyroid cancer patients in the Caner Genome Atlas project. Also, the nc886 expression level tends to be elevated and in more aggressively metastatic tumor specimens from thyroid cancer patients. In summary, we have discovered nc886's tumor-promoting role in thyroid cancer which has been concealed by the PKR-mediated acute cell death.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy, whose worldwide prevalence has been soaring because of advances in medical imaging technologies and easy accessibility to ultrasonography [1, 2]. Since it remains asymptomatic even in advanced stages, many researchers have been seeking a biomarker to distinguish more aggressive tumors from indolent ones at the time of diagnosis. However, these efforts have not been successful.
      Growing evidence indicates a significance for non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in the diagnosis and prognosis of thyroid cancer (reviewed in [3]). These ncRNAs are either small [< 50 nucleotides (nts)] or long (>200 nts) in length and play a regulatory role in gene expression by degrading target mRNAs or determining the chromatin status of target genes [4]. nc886 (a.k.a. pre-miR-886 or vtRNA2-1) is a recently identified regulatory ncRNA that is medium-sized (101 nts long) [5]. Not only in size but also in several other aspects, nc886 is distinct from those small or long ncRNAs. First, nc886 controls gene expression by binding and modulating the activity of a protein called PKR (Protein Kinase RNA-activated). Second, nc886 is transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol III) whereas a majority of regulatory ncRNAs are RNA polymerase II (Pol II) products.
      nc886's role in cancer was first noticed because of its expression pattern in a number of cancer cell lines and patient samples [5–10]. Previous studies from our laboratory and others highlighted its putative tumor suppressor role, based on its epigenetic silencing in some malignancies. However, several lines of data indicate that the elevation of nc886 expression is a more general phenomenon, especially during early stages of tumorigenesis. The nc886 level is much higher in proliferating cells than non-proliferating tissues [5]. For example, most immortalized cells express nc886 abundantly ([5–8] and unpublished data from YSL). In many cases, this high level of nc886 is sustained or becomes even higher, as immortalized cells progress into more transformed cells. The elevated expression of nc886 in cancer is seen also in miRNA profiling data where probes (against miR-886-5p and -3p) detected nc886 [11–14]. All these observations coincide with higher Pol III activity in cancer cells than normal cells (reviewed in [15]).
      nc886 plays a critical role in determining cell death or proliferation via its inhibitory function on PKR [6]. PKR was originally identified as a viral sensor that when activated upon viral infection led to cell death by phosphorylating eIF2α and consequently shutting down global cellular protein synthesis. In addition to viral sensing, PKR is involved in diverse cellular signaling pathways and is implicated in cancer. Although PKR's pro-apoptotic role initially suggested a tumor suppressor role, its precise function in cancer is still controversial (reviewed in [16]). In our published work [5, 6], epigenetic silencing of nc886 occurs in a subset of cancer cells (referred to as “nc886− cells” hereafter) and nc886 knockdown (KD) activates PKR and consequently induces apoptosis, similarly to viral infection. This result led us to propose a “tumor sensing model” in comparison to PKR's original viral sensing role, to illustrate the significance of nc886/PKR in eliminating pre-cancerous cells [17].
      Nevertheless, the precise role of nc886 in its relation with PKR in tumor promotion or suppression has yet to be elucidated. The elevated expression of nc886 in proliferating cells concurs with its oncogenic role which agrees with PKR's putative tumor suppressor function; however this idea has never been examined. Of course, nc886 may also play PKR-independent roles. Studies on nc886 have been hampered, because its depletion results in acute cell death via PKR activation. For this reason, it has been challenging to obtain an nc886− cell line from its isogenic nc886+ control cell line. Comparison between the two cell lines is essential in order to evaluate nc886's precise role in cancer. In this study, we have solved this problem by sequentially generating PKR and nc886 knockout (KO) cells and, for the first time, clearly determined their roles in thyroid cancer.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Expression analysis of nc886 in patient samples and thyroid cell lines
        We measured the expression of nc886 in paired normal/tumor samples from 37 thyroid cancer patients and classified into three groups (low, medium, and high) according to nc886 levels (Figure 1A). Elevated expression of nc886 in tumors was correlated with the number of primary tumors (p=0.028, Table 1), tumor aggressiveness (see T staging in Figure 1B, p for trend=0.050) and metastasis to lymph nodes (p=0.028, Figure 1C). However, there was no signficant association of nc886 with clinical variables such as the age at diagnosis, the size of primary tumors, and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, an autoimmune disease leading to chronic inflammation.
        
          Figure 1
          
            nc886 expression in tissue samples from thyroid cancer patients and cell lines
            A. qRT-PCR measurement of nc886 in 37 pairs of a thyroid tumor and its adjacent normal tissue. nc886 Ct values were normalized to 18S rRNA Ct values to calculate 2−ΔΔCt. Values of each tumor (black bars) are shown relative to its normal tissue whose values were set as 1 (plain bars). An average and the standard deviation from triplicate measurements are indicated. Patient identity is anonymously designated in #-number. Vertical dotted lines classify samples into low (tumor vs normal fc < 0.7), medium, and high (fc > 1.3) expression of nc886. The fc cutoffs were determined according to p-values (p < 0.05 in t-test) of the boundary samples. B-C. Sub-classification of patients in each nc886-expression group according to T staging (panel B) and lymph node metastasis (panel C). D. qRT-PCR measurement of nc886 in thyroid cell lines. The value of Nthy-ori 3-1 is set as 1. All other descriptions are the same as panel A.
          
          
        
        
          Table 1
          
            Clinical characteristics of 37 patients with papillary thyroid cancer according to the level of nc886 in tumor specimen
          
          
            
              
                
                Total n=37
                Expression level of nc886
                P-value
              
              
                Low n=18
                Medium n=8
                High n=11
              
            
            
              
                Age at diagnosis (yrs)
                47.5±11.2
                50.2±10.8
                42.0±10.2
                47.1±12.0
                0.228
              
              
                Size of tumor (cm)
                1.7±1.0
                1.7±1.1
                1.9±1.3
                1.6±0.8
                0.777
              
              
                No of primary tumor
                1.5±0.8
                1.3±0.6
                2.1±1.0
                1.5±0.7
                0.028
              
              
                Extrathyroidal extension (n, %)
                26(70.3%)
                10(55.6%)
                7 (87.5%)
                9(81.8%)
                0.157
              
              
                Advanced T stage (T3-4)
                28(75.7%)
                11(61.1%)
                7 (87.5%)
                10(90.9%)
                0.131†
              
              
                Lymph node metastasis (n, %)
                22(59.5%)
                5(27.8%)
                8 (100%)
                9 (81.8%)
                0.0005
              
              
                 N0
                15(40.5%)
                13(72.2%)
                0(0%)
                2(18.2%)
                0.028
              
              
                 N1a
                15(40.5%)
                4(22.2%)
                4(50.0%)
                7(63.6%)
                
              
              
                 N1b
                7 (18.9%)
                1 (5.6%)
                4(50.0%)
                2 (18.2%)
                
              
              
                Hashimoto's thyroiditis
                16(43.2%)
                6 (33.3%)
                4 (50.5%)
                6(54.5%)
                0.486
              
            
          
          
            * mean ± standard deviation
            
              †
              P for trend = 0.050
            
          
        
        We also measured nc886 expression in thyroid cell lines and found it to be higher in the majority of cancer cell lines than in an immortalized cell line Nthy-ori 3-1 (Figure 1D). Nthy-ori 3-1 cells, although not fully-transformed, proliferated well and expressed nc886 much more abundantly than non-proliferating thyroid tissues (Supplementary Figure S1A). Very low expression of nc886 was also previously seen in normal tissues from several organs [5], suggesting that nc886 expression is proportional to cell proliferation rates. Actually, nc886 expression became less when cell proliferation was slowed by reducing the serum concentration in the culture medium (Supplementary Figure S1B).
        The above nc886 expression pattern, together with its association with cell proliferation in vitro as well as tumor progression and aggressiveness in patients, supported a putative oncogenic role in thyroid cancer. However, nc886 was epigenetically silenced in a subset of thyroid cells (Supplementary Figure S2A-B), as previously seen in other types of cancer including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, gastric cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, and lung cancer [7–10]. Therefore we could not rule out the possibility of a tumor suppressor role. To clarify the role of nc886 in thyroid cancer, we attempted to assess its loss-of-function phenotypes.
      
      
        Acute cell death triggered by nc886 silencing and the consequent PKR activation
        As stated in the Introduction, nc886 is a repressor of PKR. When we transfected an antisense oligonucleotides (anti-oligo) targeting nc886 into Nthy-ori 3-1, SW1736, and C643 thyroid cell lines, nc886 expression level was diminished as shown by our Northern blot in Figure 2A. nc886 KD led to PKR activation, as indicated by the increase of phospho-PKR which is the active form (Figure 2B). The active PKR phosphorylated its best substrate eIF2α and consequently inhibited cell proliferation in the immortalized Nthy-ori 3-1 line as well as in a thyroid cancer cell line SW1736 (Figure 2A–2B). In contrast, neither eIF2α phosphorylation nor an effect on cell growth was observed in the other cancer cell line C643.
        
          Figure 2
          
            nc886 KD activates PKR, which impairs cell proliferation
            A. Northern hybridization of nc886 and 5S rRNA as a loading control (top panel) and cell proliferation (MTS) assays (bottom panel) after nc886 KD. “anti-nc886” (an anti-oligo targeting nc886) and “anti-control” (targeting a paralog ncRNA vtRNA1-1 but not nc886) were transfected into indicated cells at 100 nM for 48 hrs. B. Western blot of indicated proteins after nc886 KD in panel A. Molecular sizes in kilodalton (kD) from the size marker are indicated on the right. C. Summary of nc886 KD data from panel A-B and expected cellular outcomes upon nc886 KO.
          
          
        
        At first glance, this impaired cell proliferation upon nc886 KD seemed to agree with its putative oncogenic role. However, this phenomenon should be understood as the PKR-dependent “tumor sensing model” (see Introduction; [17]) rather than nc886's role in the etiology and/or progression of thyroid cancer. In other words, nc886 KD immediately provoked the PKR cell death pathway before we were able to observe any other phenotypes that could truly reflect the functional significance of nc886's elevated expression in immortalized or transformed cells. To elucidate this, it would be essential to examine long-term cellular phenotypes and make a comparison between nc886-null (nc886−) cells and isogenic nc886+ cells. Thus, nc886 KO cell lines were generated.
      
      
        Sequential generation of PKR and PKR/nc886 double KO cell lines
        Since anti-oligos do not self-propagate and thus are inappropriate for long-term KD, we took advantage of a new gene-editing technique adapted from a bacterial immune system composed of “Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)” and “CRISPR-associated genes (Cas)” (reviewed in [18]). PKR also posed a problem when generating nc886 KO cells because those cells (nc886−) are expected to die in the presence of PKR (Figure 2C). C643 cells could be a choice because they were resistant to PKR-mediated cell death (Figure 2A–2B). However, this resistance indicated that the PKR pathway had already gone awry. So it would be questionable whether any data from this cell line would appropriately reflect the role of nc886, in concert with PKR, in thyroid tumorigenesis.
        Our maneuver to solve this situation was to make PKR KO cell lines ahead of nc886 KO. In this way, comparison among wild type (designated as PKRwt/nc886wt), PKR KO (PKRKO/nc886wt), and double KO (PKRKO/nc886KO) will answer to the question about the precise contribution of nc886 and/or PKR in thyroid tumorigenesis. We chose Nthy-ori 3-1, because it is not a fully transformed cell line and so is likely to retain a more natural PKR pathway as compared to cancer cell lines. For the same reason, Nthy-ori 3-1 cells could transform in either direction: more tumorigenic or less upon nc886/PKR KO. This would be a considerable advantage because nc886 and PKR KO were expected to show opposite phenotypes.
        We designed a small guide RNA (sgRNA) targeting amino acid #15-21 in the first exon of the PKR gene (Supplementary Figure S3A). We selected PKRKO clones that were certified to have frameshifting 1-2 nt deletions by DNA sequencing (Supplementary Figure S3B-C) and accordingly no PKR protein expression by Western blot (Supplementary Figure S4A-B).
        Next we attempted to generate nc886KO from PKRKO clones. Because nc886 is an ncRNA, a deletion of 1-2 nts does not guarantee that it will be a functional KO. Therefore, we designed two sgRNAs (yellow highlighted in Supplementary Figure S5A) flanking the nc886 transcript (blue letters in Supplementary Figure S5A) in order to remove the whole DNA segment between them. These two sgRNA-expressing plasmids were transfected together into parental Nthy-ori 3-1(PKRwt) and Nthy-ori 3-1(PKRKO) cells. During initial selection of nc886KO candidate clones, we noticed that colonies were barely recovered from the original (PKRwt) Nthy-ori 3-1 cells whereas a decent number of colonies were recovered from all four PKRKO clones (Supplementary Figure S6). This result corroborated our idea that nc886 depletion is deleterious to cell proliferation and PKR activation is certainly one cause for it. We have obtained several PKRKO/nc886KO subclones which were confirmed by the appearance of a shorter PCR product indicative of a deletion of the nc886 DNA segment between the two sgRNAs (Supplementary Figure S5B) as well as by sequencing (a representative result from nc886KO clone #6 shown in Supplementary Figure S5C). We also ascertained no nc886 expression by Northern hybridization (Figure 3A) in three PKRKO/nc886KO clones (#6, #13, and #17 in Figure 3A) and used these cell lines to examine nc886's role in thyroid cancer.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Cell proliferation assays of PKR or nc886 KO cells
            A. Confirmation of KO cell lines by Western/Northern blots of PKR/nc886, with β-actin and 5S rRNA as loading controls respectively. Protein size markers are indicated on the right. Among three PKRKO/nc886KO clones shown here, functional assay data from clone #6 are shown in main figures and data from #17 and #13 shown in Supplementary Figures. B. MTT cell proliferation assays of indicated KO lines. An average and the standard deviation from nonaplicate (n=9; for PKRwt/nc886wt and PKRKO/nc886wt) or triplicate (n=3; for PKRKO/nc886KO) experiments are plotted and shown. C-D. Colony formation assays. A representative plate from each cell line after crystal violet staining is shown in panel C. In panel D, colony numbers were counted independently from nine plates (for PKRwt/nc886wt and PKRKO/nc886wt) or three plates (for PKRKO/nc886KO). An average and the standard deviation are calculated and shown.
          
          
        
      
      
        Retardation in cell growth, migration, and invasion in nc886KO cells
        Our MTT and colony formation assays demonstrated that PKRKO/nc886KO cells grew more slowly than nc886wt cells (PKRwt/nc886wt and PKRKO/nc886wt in Figure 3B–3D and Supplementary Figure S7A-C). PKR KO itself conferred a slight growth advantage, as could be seen by the larger colony sizes of PKRKO/nc886wt cells than those of PKRwt/nc886wt. However, MTT values and colony numbers were not so significantly increased in the absence of PKR (Figure 3B–3D and Supplementary Figure S7A-C). Cell migration and invasion assays yielded similar results. PKRKO/nc886KO cells were clearly less migrating and invasive than PKRKO/nc886wt cells; PKRKO/nc886wt cells were slightly more than PKRwt/nc886wt cells (Figure 4A–4D and Supplementary Figure S8A-D). Collectively from all these data, it was evident that nc886 played an oncogenic role.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Cell migration and invasion assays for PKR or nc886 KO cells
            Representative images after the assays panels A and C. and their quantification panels B and D. are shown. All the other descriptions (for example, the number of replicates for each cell line) are the same as Figure 3B-D.
          
          
        
        It should be noted that nc886KO cells were in the PKRKO-background and therefore all the phenotypes manifested by nc886 KO were PKR-independent. For example, nc886's pro-proliferative role cannot be attributed to its inhibition of PKR's pro-apoptotic function. If PKR inhibition were nc886's sole function, PKRKO/nc886KO and PKRKO/nc886wt cells would have shared an identical phenotype. Another important conclusion from our data is the contribution of PKR, which when alone appeared to play a marginal role.
      
      
        Gene expression profiling in PKRKO and nc886KO cells
        Next we further investigated the molecular basis of nc886/PKR's role. We performed microarray experiments in the three cell lines (PKRwt/nc886wt, PKRKO/nc886wt, and PKRKO/nc886KO) and obtained a list of 226 genes from expression changes between them (as diagrammed in Figure 5A; Supplementary Table S1 for the full list). As shown in a heatmap (Figure 5A, left panel), expression of 25 and 201 genes were altered respectively by PKR and nc886 KO. The microarray data were validated by measuring some altered genes by qRT-PCR (Figure 5A, right panel).
        
          Figure 5
          
            Comparison of gene expression profiles among PKRwt/nc886wt, PKRKO/nc886wt, and PKRKO/nc886KO cells
            A. A heat map showing hierarchical clustering of 226 genes whose expression values were significantly (log2(fc) > 1 or < −1) altered in PKR or nc886 KO. The complete list of 226 genes is shown in Supplementary Table S1. 201 and 25 genes were altered upon nc886 and PKR KO respectively. Some genes were chosen for qRT-PCR measurement as described in Figure 1A except that GAPDH was used for normalization. B. Kaplan-Meier curves stratifying survival of 505 patients (the TCGA cohort) according to the expression of indicated genes. In each graph “fc”, “H”, and “p” values are displayed. “fc” is the expression value (in a log2-transformed scale) of indicated genes in PKRKO/nc886KO relative to PKRKO/nc886wt in this array data. “H” and “p” indicate hazard ratio of cox regression and p-value of cox regression respectively.
          
          
        
        We mainly focused on the 201 genes for further analysis. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that 13 GO sets were altered significantly (p<0.05) upon nc886 KO and most of them were implicated directly or indirectly in tumorigenesis (Table 2). Among them, regulation of cell cycle, cell growth, and apoptosis as well as cytoskeleton organization (bold-highlighted GO terms in Table 2) might explain the nc886 KO phenotypes in cell proliferation, migration, and invasion (Figure 3–Figure 4). For example, the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins, such as EGFR, HIPK2, HSPBL2 and TAX1BP1 (see “Negative regulation of apoptosis” in Table 2), was decreased upon nc886 KO (Supplementary Table S1) and this may explain the diminished growth of the PKRKO/nc886KO cells.
        
          Table 2
          
            Gene Ontology analysis of the 201 nc886-regulated genes
          
          
            
              
                GO
                p-value
                Genes
              
            
            
              
                Regeneration
                0.006
                INA, CDKN1A, CCL2, MAP1B, VCAN
              
              
                Regulation of transforming growth factor beta receptor signaling pathway
                0.007
                CDKN1C, HTRA1, HIPK2, C5ORF13
              
              
                Localization within membrane
                0.010
                EGFR, RAC1, MAL
              
              
                Cellular response to stress
                0.014
                DBNL, CCM2, NUDT1, MAP1B, PMS2L4, RPA3, CDKN1A, EYA2, MAP1LC3A, POLD2, INSIG1, HIPK2, VACN
              
              
                
                  Cytoskeleton organization
                
                0.015
                ABLIM1, INA, LIMA1, STMN3, TMSB15A, MAP1B, RAC1, RALA, ANLN, CNN1, KRT86
              
              
                
                  Cell death
                
                0.016
                GGCT, AIMP2, HSPBL2, GARS, TBRG4, RNF216, OPTN, TAX1BP1, DDIT4, EYA2, F3, HIPK2, RAC1, TGM2, SRGN
              
              
                
                  Regulation of cyclin-dependent protein kinase activity
                
                0.018
                EGFR, CDKN1C, CDKN1A, CDKN2C
              
              
                Negative regulation of BMP signaling pathway
                0.019
                BMPER, HTRA1, HIPK2
              
              
                
                  Interphase of mitotic cell cycle
                
                0.022
                EGFR, CDKN1C, CDKN1A, CDKN2C, TBRG4
              
              
                
                  Negative regulation of apoptosis
                
                0.030
                EGFR, CDKN1A, CCL2, SFRP1, F3, HIPK2, HSPBL2, TGM2, TAX1BP1
              
              
                Vascularture development
                0.045
                CCM2, PDPN, CTGF, EFNB2, TGM2, SOX18, COL5A1
              
              
                Response to wounding
                0.047
                INA, CCL2, PDPN, CTGF, F3, MAP1B, RAC1, VCAN, AFAP1L2, CTSB, COL5A
              
              
                
                  Regulation of cell growth
                
                0.050
                CDKN1A, CDKN2C, CTGF, HTRA1, MAP1B, NPPB
              
            
          
          
            Significantly (p<0.05) enriched GO terms and names of individual genes therein
          
        
        We also performed a gene-network analysis using the GeneMANIA plug-in tool in Cytoscape (http://www.cytoscape.org/; [19]) to identify the direct physical interactions and interconnection of pathways among the 201 genes. In this network (Supplementary Figure S9), p53 and MYC were prominent hubs. p53 and MYC are the most renowned tumor suppressor and oncogene respectively and, interestingly, are known to modulate Pol III transcription and therefore nc886 expression ([15] and our unpublished data). Further studies will be needed to unravel the relation of nc886 to p53, MYC, and the 201 genes.
        Next we sought to examine data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to interrogate further nc886's clinical significance. The TCGA does not contain expression data of nc886 itself, because nc886 belongs to neither mRNA nor miRNA and therefore was excluded from most array or sequencing platforms. Instead, we examined expression of the 201 nc886-regulated genes in the TCGA RNA-seq data from 505 thyroid cancer patients (Supplementary Figure S10) to analyze their implication in patient survival. We observed that lower expression of ANLN, C5orf13 (= NREP), COL5A1, VGLL2, C15orf52, and KIAA1644 was significantly (p<0.05) associated with longer survival of the patients (Figure 5B and Supplementary Figure S11), in agreement with their lowered expression levels upon nc886 KO.
        The array data were also analyzed against the molecular signature database (MSigDB; http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp) to see which transcription factor (TF) target genes were enriched or depleted (Supplementary Figure S12A and Supplementary Table S2). We could not find any consistent elevation or depletion of TF targets upon nc886 KO. This was not so surprising because nc886 is exclusively localized to the cellular cytoplasm [5] and so any direct effect on TFs would be unlikely. Only one exception was the serum response factor (SRF) signature which was enriched upon nc886 KO (Supplementary Table S2). It needs to be clarified whether the increased activity of SRF was a direct consequence of nc886 KO.
        Although PKR KO exhibited marginal phenotypes (Figure 3–Figure 4) and also only a moderate change in gene expression (Figure 5A), we found a number of TF target genes to be altered significantly (Z-score cutoff = 3; Supplementary Figure S12A). Nine top altered TFs (Z-score cutoff = 4) were all depleted in PKRKO cells and notably seven were the NF-κB TF (dark blue bars in Supplementary Figure S12B). In addition, our pathway analysis using Biocarta identified one enriched pathway and 13 depleted pathways (Z-score cutoff = 4; Supplementary Figure S12C) among which seven were implicated in NF-κB (dark blue bars in Supplementary Figure S12C). This result corroborated the long-standing idea that PKR is the upstream of NF-κB.
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      In this study, we have clearly determined nc886's role in thyroid cancer using CRISPR/Cas-mediated gene KO and provided a novel finding that nc886 plays a putative oncogenic role (summarized in Figure 6). nc886 expression is elevated in clinical samples. nc886 KO led to decreased tumor phenotypes and also to altered expression of a set of genes, some of which have been identified as supportive of nc886's putative oncogenic roles. For example, nc886KO cells had elevated expression of CDKN2C and DKK1, known to inhibit thyroid cell proliferation and migration when overexpressed [20, 21]. However, the expression of ANLN, and C5orf13 (a.k.a. NREP and P311) was decreased in nc886 KO (Figure 5). These genes have been reported to inhibit tumor cell proliferation and migration when suppressed [22, 23] and their lower expression was associated with good survival of patients in the TCGA cohort (Figure 5). Therefore, nc886 and some of its associated genes could be an informative marker in deciding the extent of surgery in preoperative settings and in determining the dose of radioactive iodine therapy after surgery to improve the patient's outcome.
      
        Figure 6
        
          Summary cartoon for nc886's role in thyroid cancer
        
        
      
      We also clarified PKR's role in thyroid tumorigenesis in this study. To the best of our knowledge, our report is the first to utilize PKR KO human cells to evaluate tumor phenotypes. From our data in PKRKO cells, PKR per se plays an insignificant role or only a very slight tumor suppressor role. Our results here correspond with several lines of mouse data having shown no evident tumor phenotypes from PKR-null mice [24] or having indicated a moderate tumor suppressor role in certain experimental conditions [25, 26]. We surmise that PKR, only when activated, can play dual roles in cancer: inducing apoptosis to eliminate pre-cancerous cells or triggering pro-inflammatory responses. Apoptosis affects tumorigenesis negatively but a pro-inflammatory response affects a malignancy positively. In either case, PKR is not a direct driver or suppressor in tumorigenesis. Rather, we infer that the activation of PKR serves as a sentinel or a facilitator in cancer. In this regard, it would be informative to consider nc886's role in relation with PKR in thyroid cancer. Our results here showed that nc886 silencing occurred in some thyroid cancer cells (Supplementary Figure S2) as reported in other types of cancer [7–10] and that nc886 KD activated PKR (Figure 2). More efforts will be needed to elucidate the contribution of nc886/PKR to thyroid tumorigenesis.
      In summary, we have uncovered nc886's putative oncogenic role in thyroid cancer (Figure 6). Previous studies have highlighted nc886's putative tumor suppressor role mainly because its epigenetic silencing was more easily recognized in cancer cells. We presume that nc886's role in cancer is multifaceted and that its precise function will be determined by several factors such as cancer types, stages, and cellular contexts. Since it is clear from our data that nc886's oncogenic function is independent of PKR, we are currently seeking to identify its regulatory target molecule(s) in order to elucidate definitely the molecular mechanisms of malignancy.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Cell lines and tissue samples
        The following cell lines were used in this study: Nthy-ori 3-1, an SV-40 immortalized cell line derived from normal primary thyroid follicular epithelial cells [27]; BCPAP, KTC-1, SNU-790 from papillary thyroid carcinoma; FTC133 from follicular thyroid carcinoma; C643, SW1736, and Cal-62 from anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (for SNU-790, [28]; for all other cell lines, [29] and references therein). Nthy-ori 3-1 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA); BCPAP and Cal-62 were from DSMZ (Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen, Germany); C643 and SW1736 were from CLS (Cell Line Service, Germany); and KTC-1, SNU-790 and FTC133 lines are our laboratory stocks (National Cancer Center, Center for Thyroid Cancer, Korea). Cells were cultured in appropriate growth media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GE Healthcare Life Sciences; Logan, UT, USA) and 1% antibiotic-antimyotic (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA). All cell lines were grown in a humidified incubator in 5% CO2 at 37°C.
        Normal and tumor tissues were obtained from thyroid cancer patients who underwent thyroid surgery at the National Cancer Center (NCC) Hospital. All fresh tissues were frozen immediately after surgery in liquid nitrogen and stored at −70°C according to the protocols approved by the institutional review board, NCC for the human subject guideline of NCC (NCC2014-0003) that is in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Hospital medical records and pathology reports of 37 patients who underwent surgery and diagnosed as papillary thyroid cancer in our clinic were reviewed. Pathologic staging was defined according to the TNM classification system of International Union against Cancer and the American Joint Committee on Cancer, 7th edition. The clinical and pathological features of the patient are summarized in Table 1.
      
      
        Transfection, anti-oligos, RNA/protein isolation and measurement
        The source of general reagents was described in [5, 6, 8]. Anti-oligos (“anti886 75-56” and “anti-vt 21-2” which are designated as “anti-nc886” and “anti-control” respectively in this work) were prepared and transfected as described in [5]. Total RNA from patient tissue samples and cell lines was isolated by Trizol reagent (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA). Northern hybridization, qRT-PCR measurement of nc886 and control genes, Western blot of PKR and other proteins were performed as previously described [5]. Sequence information on qRT-PCR primers is available upon request.
      
      
        Generation of CRISPR/Cas KO cell lines
        “hCas9” and “gRNA_Cloning Vector” were purchased from Addgene (plasmid #41815 and #41824 respectively). A sgRNA-expressing plasmid for PKR (“pCR sgPKR-1a”) was a kind gift from Dr. Stacy Horner at Duke University. sgRNA-expressing plasmids for nc886 were constructed according to the gDNA synthesis protocol (https://www.addgene.org/41824/ and [30]). Briefly, inserts were made by annealing two partially complementary oligos containing sgRNA sequences (shown in Supplementary Figure S5A) and converting into a fully double-stranded DNA fragment by Phusion™ High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs; Ipswich, MA, USA). The inserts were incorporated into AflII-linearized “gRNA_Cloning Vector” by using the Gibson assembly kit (New England Biolabs), to yield “pCR sg886-164” and “pCR sg886+15”.
        The Cas9-expressing plasmid (“hCas9”), in combination with “pCR sgPKR-1a” (for PKR KO) or with “pCR sg886-164” and “pCR sg886+15” (for nc886 KO), was transfected by using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies). Untransfected cells were processed in parallel as a negative control during G418 selection. At 24 hrs after transfection, cells were transferred to a growth medium containing 1 mg/ml of G418. G418-resistant colonies were individually isolated and further cultured.
      
      
        Cell proliferation, migration, and invasion assays
        Cell proliferation measurement was based on the conversion of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) dye or its derivative MTS dye. MTT and MTS dyes were purchased respectively from Sigma-Aldrich and Promega (Madison, WI, USA) and assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. In colony formation assays, 100 cells were seeded into one well of a 6-well plate and maintained for 7 days. Colonies were fixed and stained with 1% crystal violet to count colony numbers.
        Cell migration assays were performed using 8-μm pore filter insert (BD Biosciences; San Jose, CA, USA). Cells were resuspended in a serum-free RPMI-1640 medium, were added onto the upper chamber, and were allowed to migrate to the lower chamber containing RPMI-1640 with 1% FBS for 24 hrs. Migrated cells on the bottom surface of the insert were fixed, air-dried for 20 min, and stained with 1% crystal violet for 20 min. Remaining cells on the top surface were removed by wiping with a cotton swab. To quantify migration rates, inserts were placed in 10% acetic acid and the absorbance at 564 nm was measured. Cell invasion assays were conducted with matrigel-coated insert (BD Biosciences). Cells were stained with Diff-Quik stain™ (Sysmex; Kobe, Japan) and counted.
      
      
        mRNA microarray and pathway analysis
        mRNA expression profiling and analysis of molecular signatures were performed as described in [7, 8]. Hierarchical clustering and generation of a heat map were done by using Cluster 3.0 and Java TreeView (version 1.1.6r4) softwares. Direct physical interactions and their corresponding pathways were estimated using the “GeneMANIA” Cytoscape plug-in function (http://www.cytoscape.org/) [19].
      
      
        TCGA data analysis
        RNA-seq data and clinical data from 505 thyroid cancer patients were downloaded from the TCGA database (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/tcgaHome2.jsp). A total of 20,132 genes available in the TCGA RNA-seq data were collected for further analysis. TCGA provides RNA-seq data in Expectation-Minimization values (RSEM) as normalized expression levels. Expression fold-change (fc) of a gene was estimated by dividing the RSEM of a gene by the average of RSEM estimated from the total 505 patient samples and was log2-transformed. Following the procedure previously reported [31], RSEM values of 0 ~ 0.1 were all replaced to 0.1 to avoid the infinity problem in calculating the expression fc. According to expression levels of a selected gene, the patients were classified into “high-expression group” (if a log2(fc) value is > 0)” and “low-expresion group” (< 0), as described previously [32]. Among 201 nc886-regulated genes (Figure 5), 189 genes were found in the gene list of the TCGA RNA-seq data and were used for survival analysis (see Supplementary Figure S10). The R studio was used for all statistical tests and analyses (http://www.rstudio.com/). The ‘survival’ packages were used (http://r-forge.r-project.org) to draw Kaplan-Meier curve and to calculate the Cox proportional hazard ratio.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        Descriptive analyses were performed to identify patient demographics. For analysis of categorical variables, frequencies and percentages were calculated. The patients were divided into three groups (low, medium, and high) according to the expression of nc886 in thyroid cancer tissues. Proportions in each group were compared using the χ2 and Fisher's exact test. For analysis of continuous variables, means and standard deviations were determined. The differences of the continuous variables were analyzed using Mann-Whitney U test, Student's unpaired two-sided t-test or a one-way ANOVA. Statistical analyses were performed with STATA software (version 10, StataCorp., College Station, TX, USA). All p-values were two-sided, and p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        Increasing evidence suggests that ion channels not only regulate electric signaling in excitable cells but also play important roles in the development of brain tumor. However, the roles of ion channels in glioma remain controversial. In the present study, we systematically analyzed the expression patterns of ion channel genes in a cohort of Chinese patients with glioma using RNAseq expression profiling. First, a molecular signature comprising three ion channel genes (KCNN4, KCNB1 and KCNJ10) was identified using Univariate Cox regression and two-tailed student's t test conducted in overall survival (OS) and gene expression. We assigned a risk score based on three ion channel genes to each primary Glioblastoma multiforme (pGBM) patient. We demonstrated that pGBM patients who had a high risk of unfavorable outcome were sensitive to chemotherapy. Next, we screened the three ion genes-based signature in different molecular glioma subtypes. The signature showed a Mesenchymal subtype and wild-type IDH1 preference. Gene ontology (GO) analysis for the functional annotation of the signature showed that patients with high-risk scores tended to exhibit the increased expression of proteins associated with apoptosis, immune response, cell adhesion and motion and vasculature development. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) results showed that pathways associated with negative regulation of programmed cell death, cell proliferation and locomotory behavior were highly expressed in the high-risk group. These results suggest that ion channel gene expression could improve the subtype classification in gliomas at the molecular level. The findings in the present study have been validated in two independent cohorts.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Ion channels, membrane proteins expressed in all living cells, create pathways for charged ions, including calcium (Ca2+), potassium (K+), sodium (Na+), and chloride (Cl−) ions. During the last few years, ion channels have been demonstrated to play critical roles in gene expression, immune response, cell volume regulation, cell migration, and cell proliferation [1–3]. Particularly, there is increasing evidence that ion channels are involved in the progression of human cancers [4–7] and ion channel genes-based signature has the potential role in prognosis of breast cancer and lung cancer [8, 9].
      Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary central nervous system tumor with a current median survival of approximately 15 months [10]. Despite continuous progress in neurosurgery, the infiltrative behavior of gliomas precludes complete tumor resection and is certainly the primary reason for the poor clinical outcome for patients [11, 12]. Ion channel genes have been demonstrated that play an important role in brain tumor metastasis [13, 14].
      In this study, we used RNASeq datasets from CGGA and a set of 280 ion channel genes to identify an ion genes-based signature for clinical outcomes of primary GBM (pGBM) patients. We then built a predictive model based on the three ion genes that correlated overall survival (OS) and validated the model by applying it to the TCGA and REMBRANDT datasets. The three ion genes signature identified patients who had a high risk of unfavorable outcome were sensitive to chemotherapy.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Identification of a three ion channel genes signature for prognosis in pGBM patients
        A total of 280 ion channel genes were collected for the present study (Additional file 1: Supplementary Table S1). To identify ion channel genes which were associated with grade progression, we first compared genome expression in grade II or grade IV gliomas with that in grade III gliomas (II VS III and III VS IV) in CGGA dataset of gliomas, then a two-sided log-rank test was used to analyze each ion genes in GBM patients. Finally, three channel genes (KCNN4, KCNB1 and KCNJ10) were identified to be significantly correlated with malignant progression and associated with OS (Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary Table S2). The expression value of KCNN4 is upregulated and KCNB1 and KCNJ10 are downregulated in gliomas. We then applied the three genes as a signature to develop a risk score formula by using the risk score method. The risk score for each patient was then calculated. Using the median risk score as the cutoff value, the patients were successfully divided into a high risk group and a low risk group. The patients with the high risk score had a shorter median OS than patients with the low risk score in GBM and pGBM. (p < 0.001) (Figure 1A–1B). The risk score and OS distribution were shown in Figure 2A and 2B.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Prognostic values of three ion channel genes-based signature for patients in training and validation datasets
            Patients in low risk group showed a better prognosis than those in high risk group according to the signature risk score in the CGGA dataset (A–B), the TCGA data (C), and the Rembrandt data (D). L, low risk group; H, high risk group; pGBM, primary GBM.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 2
          
            Distributions of risk score of pGBM and OS of their patients in the three datasets
            (A) Signature risk score distribution. (B) Patient overall survival duration. (C) Expression of the three ion channel genes-based signature along the risk score. Red indicates high expression and green indicate low expression.
          
          
        
        We then determined the dependence of the signature of clinicopathological and molecular parameters in pGBM patients from CGGA database by multivariate Cox regression analyses. All the parameters (Table 1) were selected based on our clinical experiences that were related to prognosis. We found that the risk score, chemotherapy and radiotherapy status were statistically associated with OS. Multivariate Cox analysis indicated that the risk score was an independent prognostic factor (p < 0.05) (Table 2).
        
          Table 1
          
            Characteristics of patients in low risk and high risk group in three datasets
          
          
            
              
                
                
                CGGA
                
                  p
                
                TCGA
                
                  p
                
                Rembrandt
                
                  p
                
              
              
                LR
                HR
                LR
                HR
                LR
                HR
              
            
            
              
                Sample size
                
                41
                42
                
                79
                79
                
                92
                91
                
              
              
                
                F
                15
                15
                
                26
                32
                
                24
                24
                
              
              
                Gender
                M
                26
                27
                > .05
                53
                47
                > .05
                48
                37
                > .05
              
              
                
                NA
                0
                0
                
                0
                0
                
                20
                30
                
              
              
                Age
                
                46.3 ± 11.8
                54.0 ± 12.3
                < .01
                58.5 ± 14.4
                62.8 ± 10.1
                < .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                Y
                31
                27
                
                74
                78
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                Radiotherapy
                N
                9
                7
                > .05
                5
                1
                > .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                NA
                2
                8
                
                0
                0
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                Y
                30
                21
                
                58
                57
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                Chemotherapy
                N
                10
                12
                > .05
                20
                22
                > .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                NA
                1
                9
                
                0
                0
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                WT
                32
                41
                
                71
                78
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                IDH1 mutation
                Mut
                9
                1
                < .05
                7
                1
                > .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                NA
                0
                0
                
                1
                0
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                WT
                37
                38
                
                3
                1
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                ATRX
                Mut
                4
                4
                > .05
                73
                75
                > .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                
                NA
                0
                0
                
                3
                3
                
                NA
                NA
                
              
              
                KPS
                
                NA
                NA
                
                75.5 ± 14.9
                77.6 ± 14.9
                > .05
                NA
                NA
                
              
            
          
          
            P value for age and KPS: t test; p value for others: chi-square test or Fisher's exact test; LR, low risk group; HR, high risk group; F, female; M male; NA, not available; WT, wild type; Mut, mutation; KPS, Karnofsky performance status; Y, underwent radiotherapy/chemotherapy; N, not underwent radiotherapy/chemotherapy.
          
        
        
          Table 2
          
            Factors associated with OS in the Cox regression analysis for pGBM patients from the CGGA dataset
          
          
            
              
                
                Univariate Cox Regression
                Multivariate Cox Regression
              
            
            
              
                variable
                HR
                95% CI
                p value
                HR
                95%CI
                p value
              
              
                Gender (Female vs. Male)
                1.321
                0.735–2.375
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
              
                Age (< 45 vs. > 45)
                1.221
                0.691–2.159
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
              
                Risk score (Low vs. High)
                2.042
                1.152–3.620
                < 0.05
                2.133
                1.105–4.115
                < 0.05
              
              
                Chemotherapy (Yes vs. No)
                0.359
                0.196–0.656
                < 0.01
                0.434
                0.222–0.848
                < 0.05
              
              
                Radiotherapy (Yes vs. No)
                0.468
                0.239–0.917
                < 0.05
                0.585
                0.266–1.289
                > 0.05
              
              
                IDH1 status (MUT vs. WT)
                0.308
                0.097–0.974
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
              
                ATRX status (MUT vs. WT)
                0.444
                0.062–3.192
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
            
          
          
            WT, wild type; Mut, mutation. Yes, underwent radiotherapy/chemotherapy; No, not underwent radiotherapy/chemotherapy.
          
        
      
      
        Validation of the prognostic value of the three genes signature in two additional datasets
        Further, we validated the independent predictive power of the three genes signature in the TCGA and REMBRANDT datasets. For the 158 and 183 pGBM in TCGA and REMBRANDT datasets, we used the same β value obtained from the training set to calculate the risk scores. Patients were also divided into high risk group and low risk group according to the risk score (cutoff: median risk score). The prognostic value of the signatures was validated by the two datasets (p < 0.01 for all the two datasets, Figure 1C–1D). The risk score and OS distribution were also shown in Figure 2A–2B.
        We then validated the dependence of the signature of clinicopathological and molecular parameters in pGBM patients from TCGA datasets by multivariate Cox regression analyses. The parameters related to prognosis were selected (Table 1). We found that the risk score, age and IDH1 status were statistically associated with OS. Multivariate Cox analysis validated that the risk score was an independent prognostic factor (p < 0.05) (Supplementary Table S3).
      
      
        The three ion genes-based signature assisted predicting the efficacy of chemotherapy in pGBM patients
        To determine whether the three genes signature assists in predicting the efficacy of postoperative radiotherapy (RT) and chemotherapy (CT) in pGBM patients, we extracted the therapeutic information available for 83 pGBM patients in the CGGA datasets (Figure 3A, p < 0.001). According to risk scores, 27 patients (6 patients underwent RT and 21 patients underwent RT+CT) were stratified to the high-risk group and the other 31 patients (7 patients underwent RT and 24 patients underwent RT+CT) to the low-risk group. Among high-risk pGBM patients, a more favorable survival benefit was observed in the RT+CT treatment group compared to the RT alone group (Figure 3C, p < 0.01), while OS did not differ significantly between RT+CT and RT alone treatment group among low-risk pGBM patients (Figure 3B, p > 0.05).
        
          Figure 3
          
            The signature predicted the efficacy of radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy in pGBM patients
            (A, D) pGBM patients in CGGA and TCGA treated with RT + CT showed a better prognosis than those with RT alone. (B, E) Benefit of RT + CT was observed in the high risk group with significantly improved OS (p < 0.05). (C, F) The addition of CT to RT did not improve OS of patients in the low risk group (p > 0.05). RT, radiotherapy; CT, chemotherapy; LR, low risk group; HR, high risk group.
          
          
        
        We then used 158 pGBM patients treated with standard RT with or without CT in TCGA databases to confirm the therapeutic predictive value of the signature (Figure 3D, p < 0.05). Similarly, RT+CT was only beneficial for the high-risk pGBM patients (21 RT/57 RT+CT) but not for the low-risk pGBM patients (15 RT/59 RT+CT) (Figure 3E–3F). The findings indicate that high-risk pGBM patients were sensitive to chemotherapy.
      
      
        The three genes signature showed a subtype preference
        Considering the promising potential of the three ion genes signature in predicting clinical therapies, we next screened the expression of the three genes signature in different molecular glioma subtypes. We found that tumors of patients with high risk scores obviously displayed TCGA Mesenchymal subtype and wild-type IDH1 preference in the three datasets of CGGA, TCGA and REMBRANDT (P < 0.001, respectively) (Figure 4A–4B).
        
          Figure 4
          
            Distribution of molecular and clinical pathological features for pGBM patients in three datasets
            (A) The high risk score tumors displayed Mesenchymal subtype and wild-type IDH1 preference. (B) The differentially expressed genes were shown arranged from the low to high risk score. Pink represents the high expression of genes in the high risk group; blue represents the low expression of the genes in high risk group.
          
          
        
      
      
        Functional Annotation of the three genes signature
        In order to find out the functional basis of the notable difference in prognosis, we also performed SAM on high and low risk group in three datasets. After 1000 times of permutation test, those genes with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 were considered to be differentially expressed between the two groups. By screening the top 1000 increased expression genes, the overlapped genes (424 genes with increased expression in high risk group, Additional file 1: Supplementary Table S4) were chosen for further analysis. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that the associated genes, among those highly expressed in the high-risk group, were primarily associated with the apoptosis, immune response, cell adhesion and motion and vasculature development (Figure 5A). Furthermore, GSEA results showed that pathways associated with negative regulation of programmed cell death, cell proliferation and locomotory behavior were highly expressed in the high-risk group (Figure 5B).
        
          Figure 5
          
            Functional annotation of the high risk group
            (A) GO analysis revealed the significant association of the genes with increased expression in high risk group with four main pathways. Column height: gene counts; point height: enrichment p value. (B) Three representative plots of GSEA from enriched pathways in high risk group, analyzed by gene set enrichment analysis of CGGA and TCGA RNAseq data.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      In recent years, the gene expression-based molecular classification of gliomas has rapidly developed [15, 16]. Previous studies suggested that a multiple ion channel genes-based risk signature can provide a more statistical analysis than a single gene [8, 9]. The aim of our study was to identify a small group of genes whose expression predicts survival in pGBM gliomas and can be readily measured. We first identified three ion channel genes (KCNN4, KCNB1 and KCNJ10) significantly associated with OS of pGBM patients, then we designated the three genes as the three ion gene-based signature. The ion gene signature was then demonstrated as a promising prognostic molecular signature for predicting the OS in three independent cohorts from different regions worldwide. We also observed the preferred expression of the ion gene signature in mesenchymal subtype and wild-type IDH1.
      In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that downregulation of ion channels is an important mechanism in drug resistance via impairment of cell death [17, 18]. As drug resistance to chemotherapy is the major challenge in the treatment of pGBM, it will be increasingly important to identify patients who do not benefit from chemotherapy and who may be candidates for early treatment with chemotherapy. In our study, among high-risk pGBM patients, a more favorable survival benefit was observed in the RT+CT treatment group compared to the RT alone group (p < 0.01). However, OS did not differ significantly between RT+CT and RT alone treatment group among low-risk pGBM patients. The findings indicate that the low-risk patients should avoid unnecessary chemotherapy treatment since it usually causes toxic side-effects.
      Several studies reported that ion channel genes play the important role of apoptosis, proliferation, cell migration [2, 14, 19–21]. In our studies, GO analysis revealed that patients with high-risk scores are likely associated with the apoptosis, immune response, cell motion and vasculature development. GSEA results showed that pathways associated with negative regulation of programmed cell death, cell proliferation and locomotory behavior were highly expressed in the high-risk group.
      Previous studies have investigated the prognostic roles of the three ion channel genes in the process of tumors. These three genes are all included in the family of the potassium channels. KCNB1 (Kv2.1) is the principal voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channel underlying delayed-rectifier currents (IDR) in most mammalian brain neurons. We identified KCNB1 was associated with malignant progression and outcome in gliomas. Moreover, KCNB1 plays an important role in the autophagy induction via activation of the ERK signaling pathway (manuscript in submission).
      KCNN4 (KCa3.1) channels belong to the Ca2+-activated potassium channel superfamily and the activation of these channels is dependent on conformational changes in calcium calmodulin [22]. Previous researches have revealed that KCNN4 channels regulate cell cycle progression and cell growth in human endometrial cancer and prostate cancer cells [23, 24]. More importantly, KCa3.1 channels are involved in the infiltrative behavior of glioblastoma and significantly enhances glioma invasion [21, 25, 26].
      KCNJ10 (Kir4.1), is the predominant K+ channel in mature astrocytes and responsible for establishing the astrocytes negative resting membrane potential [27]. KCNJ10 was demonstrated as overexpressed in glioma cells and promoted cell differentiation and inhibited growth in gliomas [28].
      Limitation of this study includes the fact that it is a retrospective research and three ion genes-based signature was generated from the small population of the validation datasets. For clinical application, a larger independent dataset in a prospective study is required.
      In summary, we identified a novel three ion channel genes-based signature with independent prognostic significance for pGBM that can be a useful tool for identifying patients who would most benefit from chemotherapy treatment.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Patients and samples
        All glioma samples included in our study were from the Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA), which were composed of 109 grade II gliomas, 41 grade III gliomas and 83 primary GBM. The patients underwent surgical resection between January 2006 and December 2009. Patients were eligible for the study if the diagnosis of glioma was established histologically according to the 2007 WHO classification. These patients underwent surgery and were followed-up at Beijing Tiantan hospital. Clinicopathological data, including gender, age, pathologic diagnosis and the results of molecular analysis were obtained.
        Whole transcriptome sequencing of 233 gliomas were obtained from Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) database (http://www.cgga.org.cn) [29]. The other two datasets were downloaded from the repository for the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) and the molecular brain neoplasia data (REMBRANDT, http://caintegrator.nci.nih.gov/rembrandt).
        The definition of human ion channel genes was obtained from GeneCards [30, 31] and IUPHAR-DB [32]. In total, we collected 280 ion channels, including voltage-dependent and non-voltage-dependent ion channels.
      
      
        Signature development
        Patients surviving more than 90 days were eligible for the study since too short survival time were more likely resulted from severe complication rather than glioma occurrence. Overall survival (OS) was calculated as the interval from the day of first surgery to death or the end of follow-up. Firstly, an unpaired two-tailed Student's t test was used to compare the expression value of each gene in grade II or grade IV gliomas with that in grade III gliomas (II VS III and III VS IV) in three datasets of gliomas (CGGA, TCGA, and REMBRANDT). Then, the prognostic difference of a certain gene was calculated by the Univariate COX regression analysis with log-rank test by packages (survival) of R to get the corresponding Hazard Ratio (HR) in each grade. Then genes which were associated with grade progression and significant prognostic value (p-value < 0.05) were used to developed a linear combination of the gene expression level (expr) weighted by the regression coefficient derived from the univariate Cox regression analysis (β). As a result, we identified three ion channel genes, which were then used as a signature for prediction utility assessment. Based on the three-gene signature, the risk score for each patient was calculated as follows:
Risk score=exprgene1×βgene1+exprgene2×βgene2+…+exprgene n×βgene n
        According to this model, the patients having higher risk scores were expected to have poor OS. Patients of every grade in the training dataset were stratified into a high-risk or a low-risk group by using the 50th percentile risk score as the cut-off. We used the same β in the validation sets.
      
      
        DAVID analysis of associated genes in gliomas
        Significant analysis of microarray (SAM) was performed in pGBM to identify differently expressed genes, followed GO [33] and GSEA analysis of the differently expressed genes highly expressed in the high risk score group.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad Prism 5.0 by Student's t test or Mann–Whitney test. The associations between risk score and clinicopathological features were tested by Pearson Chi-Square test. Kaplan–Meier and log-rank methods were used to compare OS curves using SPSS version 20. Statistically significant variables in the univariable analysis were included in multivariable analysis using Cox proportional hazards model. All statistical tests were two-sided. A difference was considered significant when p < 0.05.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        PSMB5 mutations and upregulation of the β5 subunit of the proteasome represent key determinants of acquired resistance to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) in leukemic cells in vitro. We here undertook a multi-modality (DNA, mRNA, miRNA) array-based analysis of human CCRF-CEM leukemia cells and BTZ-resistant subclones to determine whether or not complementary mechanisms contribute to BTZ resistance. These studies revealed signatures of markedly reduced expression of proteolytic stress related genes in drug resistant cells over a broad range of BTZ concentrations along with a high upregulation of myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) gene expression. MARCKS upregulation was confirmed on protein level and also observed in other BTZ-resistant tumor cell lines as well as in leukemia cells with acquired resistance to other proteasome inhibitors. Moreover, when MARCKS protein expression was demonstrated in specimens derived from therapy-refractory pediatric leukemia patients (n = 44), higher MARCKS protein expression trended (p = 0.073) towards a dismal response to BTZ-containing chemotherapy. Mechanistically, we show a BTZ concentration-dependent association of MARCKS protein levels with the emergence of ubiquitin-containing vesicles in BTZ-resistant CEM cells. These vesicles were found to be extruded and taken up in co-cultures with proteasome-proficient acceptor cells. Consistent with these observations, MARCKS protein associated with ubiquitin-containing vesicles was also more prominent in clinical leukemic specimen with ex vivo BTZ resistance compared to BTZ-sensitive leukemia cells. Collectively, we propose a role for MARCKS in a novel mechanism of BTZ resistance via exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins in BTZ-resistant cells leading to quenching of proteolytic stress.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      The proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ, Velcade®) is registered for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) and mantle cell lymphoma [1, 2] and is currently undergoing clinical evaluation in other hematological malignancies, such as pediatric acute leukemia [3]. Through reversible inhibition of the chymotrypsin-like activity of the β5 subunit and to a lesser extent the caspase-like activity of the β1 subunit of the 20S proteasome, BTZ specifically blocks proteasomal degradation of ubiquitinated proteins [4, 5]. Consequently, misfolded and poly-ubiquitinated proteins accumulate thereby activating the unfolded protein response (UPR) [6, 7]. The balance between protein production and the extent of degradation inhibition plays a key role in the cytotoxic activity exerted by BTZ [7]. Moreover, inhibition of multiple pro-survival pathways [8–13] contribute to the BTZ induced apoptosis. Despite the proven efficacy of BTZ, development of drug resistance is an emerging obstacle [14]. Although the mechanism underlying BTZ resistance in hematological malignancies is only partly understood, several proteasomal and non proteasomal-related factors involved in BTZ resistance have been suggested [14–17]. With respect to the latter, upregulation of heat shock proteins [18–20], drug extrusion by P-glycoprotein [21–23], upregulation of P21(WAF1/CIP1) [24], activation of the AKT/mTOR pro-survival pathway [25], downregulation of XBP1s [26], decreased CIP2A activity [27] and Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions [28] have been suggested to be implicated in BTZ-resistance. Proteasome-related mechanisms of BTZ resistance are associated with differential upregulation of β5 subunit along with downregulation of immunoproteasome subunit [21, 29–34]. Specifically, in acute leukemia cell lines and childhood ALL and AML leukemic blast cells, a lower ratio of immunoproteasome subunits over constitutive subunits was associated with a decreased sensitivity to BTZ [35]. Remarkably, reversing this balance towards increased immunoproteasome subunits upon treatment with interferon-γ exposure restored BTZ sensitivity in BTZ-resistant leukemic cells [31]. Moreover, acquisition of PSMB5 mutations and upregulation of mutated β5 subunits were frequently identified in hematological tumor and various solid tumor cell lines which conferred high levels of BTZ resistance in vitro [14, 17, 21, 29, 32, 36–39]. The identified mutations in PSMB5 form a cluster in a region that encodes for critical amino acids within or in close proximity to the BTZ- binding pocket of the β5 subunit resulting in decreased BTZ binding [29, 40]. Next generation proteasome inhibitors displayed differential capacities to overcome BTZ in hematological cells, but appeared themselves prone to the development of drug resistance by mechanisms including PSMB5 mutations [41, 42]. A currently open question is how BTZ-resistant cells harboring PSMB5 mutations handle proteolytic stress upon exposure of increasing BTZ concentrations. Examining the ability of BTZ to inhibit the catalytic activity of the mutated β5 subunit revealed a 2-fold lower potency as compared to non-mutated β5 subunits, whereas the cell growth inhibitory capacity was repressed by a factor of > 100 fold [29, 41]. These findings suggest that BTZ resistant cells acquired additional compensatory mechanism(s) to cope with the proteolytic stress. To gain further insight into these underlying molecular mechanisms, we undertook a multi-modality (DNA, mRNA, miRNA) array-based analysis of human CCRF-CEM leukemia cells and two subclones harboring PSMB5 mutations, one with a moderate and one with a high level BTZ resistance. These studies revealed a highly upregulated myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) gene expression which correlated with protein expression. Moreover, MARCKS protein expression was associated with a BTZ concentration-dependent vesicular secretion of ubiquitinated proteins. The relevance of this novel function of MARCKs in BTZ resistance was further corroborated in BTZ and second generation proteasome inhibitor resistant hematological cell lines, ex vivo BTZ-resistant pediatric ALL cells, and clinical specimens of ALL children receiving BTZ-containing chemotherapy.
    
    
      RESULTS
      To identify novel mechanisms of BTZ resistance, the human CCRF-CEM leukemia cell line and its BTZ-resistant sublines, i.e. CEM/BTZ7 (10-fold resistance), CEM/BTZ100 (140-fold resistance) and CEM/BTZ200 cells (170-fold resistance) [31, 43] were studied and analyzed in a multi-modality array-based analyses including comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), micro-RNA (miRNA) and gene expression (GEP) arrays.
      
        ArrayCGH analysis
        ArrayCGH analyses of two BTZ-resistant subclones were compared to parental CEM/WT cells. Genetic alterations identified in CEM/BTZ7 cells included: a deletion of small area of the long arm of chromosome 5, a duplication of a large area on the end of the long arm of chromosome 11, a near complete duplication of the long arm of chromosome 14 as well as a complete loss of one of the three X-chromosomes (Supplementary Figure S1A). Of note, chromosome 14 harbors multiple proteasomal subunits, including PSMB5 (β5) and PSMA3 (α7) which we were previously shown to be upregulated at the protein level in the BTZ-resistant CEM lines [29]. In addition, a limited number of small duplications and deletions on different chromosomes were observed. Similar genetic alterations were identified in CEM/BTZ200 cells (Supplementary Figure S1B). Karyotype analysis of CEM/WT and CEM/BTZ200 cells confirmed the loss of chromosome X and duplication of chromosome 14 (Supplementary Figure S1C and S1D).
      
      
        miRNA array analysis
        miRNA array analysis was performed to identify possible regulatory miRNAs involved in BTZ resistance. Figure 1 shows all differentially expressed miRNAs in CEM/BTZ100 and CEM/BTZ200 cells as compared to parental CEM/WT cells. Among the most down-regulated miRNAs were the hypoxia-induced miR-210 [43], the Myc down-regulated miR-23a [44], the hematological differentiation inducing miR-150 (reviewed in [45]) and the possible tumor suppressor miR-149 [46]. Of the upregulated miRNAs, miR-181c has been associated with cell proliferation [47, 48] and miR-19b has been correlated with 5-FU resistance [49]. In contrast to these miRNAs supporting pro-survival, two other upregulated miRNA's have been described to have the opposite effect. miR- 101 has been described to be a pro-apoptotic factor in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia [50] and miR-7 as an tumor suppressor inhibiting various receptor tyrosine kinases such as EGFR [51], IGF-1R [52] and p21 activated kinase (PAK1) [53]. miR-29b, which was recently shown to target the proteasome subunit PSME4 and disrupt the autophagosome pathway in BTZ-resistant MM cells [54], was not down-regulated in CEM/BTZ cells, indicating non-overlapping profiles in BTZ-resistant acute leukemia and MM cells. An overview of expression validated target genes of the differentially expressed miRNAs is presented in Supplementary Table S1. Differentially expressed miRNAs were not located on amplified or deleted genomic regions identified in the arrayCGH analysis.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Differential miRNA expression between BTZ-resistant CEM cells and CEM/WT
            Red color represents upregulation, green color downregulation.
          
          
        
      
      
        Gene expression profile (GEP) analysis
        In order to identify differences in response to BTZ exposure in sensitive and BTZ resistant CEM cells, parental CEM/WT cells were treated with 7 nM BTZ for 24 hours (CEM/WT_BTZ) and compared to the different resistant sublines, treated for 24 hours with a concentration of BTZ on which they normally thrive (CEM/BTZ7 with 7 nM, CEM/BTZ100 with 100 nM and the CEM/BTZ200 with 200 nM of BTZ). Ratios of gene expression were calculated as compared to untreated parental CEM/WT. Figure 2 shows the 50 most upregulated and downregulated genes after treatment of CEM/WT cells with BTZ for 24 hours. After clustering, 2 groups with highly differentially expressed genes between CEM/WT_BTZ and all resistant subtypes were identified. The right top side of Figure 2 shows a closer view of cluster 1, containing genes highly down-regulated in CEM/WT_BTZ cells which were essentially unchanged in the BTZ-resistant CEM sublines. The functions of the genes in cluster 1 were diverse and affected pathways including: cell proliferation, immune response, TGF-β pathway and transcriptional regulation. When focusing on cluster 2, the genes upregulated in the CEM/WT_BTZ and unchanged in the BTZ-resistant cell lines are nearly all involved in UPR, apoptosis or JNK cascade signaling (Figure 2 right, bottom). Clearly, the stress response observed in the CEM/WT cells by BTZ was not observed in the BTZ-resistant CEM cells.
        
          Figure 2
          
            Top 50 upregulated and top 50 significantly down-regulated genes (p < 0.05) comparing CEM/WT_BTZ (CEM/WT cells incubated for 24 hrs with 7 nM BTZ) to CEM/BTZ7 (CEM cells resistant to 7 nM BTZ)
            The figure depicts this selection of genes for all CEM variations as a ratio of the untreated CEM/WT cells. (Clustering performed using Cluster 3.0) An overview of top 50 upregulated and top 50 down-regulated genes is depicted. For genes in cluster 1 and cluster 2, gene annotation and function are provided.
          
          
        
        Of the highest differentially expressed genes comparing the CEM/WT_BTZ to the CEM/BTZ7, several genes overlapped with the genes found in clusters 1 and 2 (Figure 2) and several other genes were identified (Figure 3A). Among the genes that were down-regulated in the BTZ-resistant CEM lines as compared to the CEM/WT_BTZ cells were several stress-related genes (including DNAJB1, DDIT3, HSP1 and HSPA1A) and immune-related genes (including CXCL2, CXCL3, and IL-8). The most down-regulated gene was XIST, which resides on the X-chromosome and which is in concordance with our array CGH analysis.
        
          Figure 3
          
            (A) Top 20 up- and downregulated genes (p < 0.05) and (B) proteasomal genes comparing CEM/WT_BTZ with CEM/BTZ7 (p < 0.05). Results for all CEM variations are depicted as a ratio of the untreated CEM/WT. Red color represents upregulation, whereas green downregulation of expression.
          
          
        
        The list of upregulated genes contains several genes encoding for enzymes involved in detoxification (including ALDH7A1, ALH2, GSTM3 and DHRS2), CD1 genes (CD1A, CD1D and CD1E), the cell cycle gene TERT and several genes involved in cytoskeleton regulation and vesicle migration (ENAH, SCRN1 (SES1), SGEF, TMSB15A, C9orf58 (AIF1L) and MARCKS. Of all genes, MARCKS (myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate) was the most differentially overexpressed gene with a 25- to 42-fold upregulation in the BTZ-resistant leukemia cell lines.
        It has been shown that BTZ induces upregulation of multiple proteasomal genes after short-term drug exposure [10]. The expression of constitutive proteasomal genes in CEM/WT cells was upregulated upon BTZ exposure (Figure 3B). Interestingly, only a small difference was observed in proteasomal gene expression when comparing parental cells and BTZ-resistant tumor cell lines after 24 hours of BTZ treatment. Upon BTZ treatment, CEM/WT cells displayed an upregulation of the constitutive proteasome along with down-regulation of the immune proteasome (i.e. subunits PSMB8, PSMB9 and PSMB10). In BTZ-resistant cell lines, apart from upregulation of the constitutive proteasome, expression of immune proteasome was largely normalized to CEM/WT levels.
        To gain more insight into the interaction between upregulated and downregulated genes, pathway as well as gene set enrichment analysis was performed. Using the GeneGo tool, several protein stress pathways known to be involved in BTZ-induced cytotoxicity [6, 7, 55], including “apoptosis and survival endoplasmic reticulum stress response” and “protein folding response to proteins stress” were identified showing upregulation of several genes in CEM/WT_BTZ as compared to untreated parental CEM/WT cells (Supplementary Figure S2A and S2B). When CEM/BTZ7 was compared with CEM/WT_BTZ, a downregulation of these pathways was observed (Supplementary Figure S2A and S2C). An overview of the top identified affected network processes including these protein stress pathways when comparing CEM/WT_BTZ to the untreated parental CEM/WT cells is shown in Table 1 (left column). In contrast, when the resistant CEM/BTZ7 cells were compared with CEM/WT_BTZ, the opposite trend was observed in these pathways (Table 1, right column) indicating a lack of stress in these BTZ-resistant cells.
        
          Table 1
          
            Overview of network processes identified using GeneGO pathway analysis based on GEP
          
          
            
              
                CEM/WT_BTZ vs CEM/WT Process –networks
                P value
                CEM/BTZ7 vs CEM/WT_BTZ Process –networks
                P value
              
            
            
              
                Protein folding_Response to unfolded proteins
                9,87E-11
                Protein folding_Response to unfolded proteins
                6,19E-11
              
              
                Protein folding_Folding in normal condition
                4,06E-07
                Apoptosis_Endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway
                1,17E-05
              
              
                Apoptosis_Endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway
                3,34E-05
                Protein folding_Folding in normal condition
                2,42E-05
              
              
                Apoptosis_Apoptotic mitochondria
                1,27E-03
                Apoptosis_Apoptotic mitochondria
                2,60E-04
              
              
                Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus
                3,20E-03
                Reproduction_Male sex differentiation
                7,11E-04
              
              
                Proteolysis_Ubiquitin-proteasomal proteolysis
                8,27E-03
                Immune response_Th17-derived cytokines
                1,12E-03
              
              
                Inflammation_IL-6 signaling
                8,34E-03
                Reproduction_FSH-beta signaling pathway
                1,21E-03
              
              
                Inflammation_Neutrophil activation
                9,02E-03
                Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus
                2,58E-03
              
              
                Cytoskeleton_Intermediate filaments
                1,05E-02
                Inflammation_IL-6 signaling
                3,43E-03
              
              
                Protein folding_ER and cytoplasm
                1,18E-02
                Reproduction_Spermatogenesis, motility and copulation
                4,45E-03
              
            
          
          
            Corresponding P-values are given for the identified pathways. Pathways analysis was performed using GeneGO on significant altered genes (P < 0.05) and with a fold change > Log2.
          
        
        Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) confirmed upregulation of several stress-related gene sets in CEM/BTZ cells, including the set of genes most significantly changed after exposure to the proteasome inhibitor epoxomicin (gene set CONCANNON_APOPTOSIS_BY_EPOXOMICIN_UP [56]). Proliferation, protein metabolism and MYC-related gene sets were down-regulated. In contrast, the CEM/BTZ7 gene expression profile was enriched for MYC-regulated genes and did not show upregulation of protein stress gene sets. (Supplementary Table S2). In addition, miRNA expression was correlated with GEP. In this selected gene list, pathway analysis was performed as well. An overview of the highly affected pathways is depicted in Table 2. Apart from comparable pathways including protein handling and apoptosis, several cytoskeleton-associated pathways were identified. Collectively, these data indicate that ER stress is most likely to be the dominant mechanism of BTZ-induced cytotoxicity in parental CCRF-CEM cells. Whereas, the diminished stress observed in drug resistant CEM/BTZ7 cells suggests a novel resistance mechanism circumventing the UPR.
        
          Table 2
          
            Overview of process-networks and gene ontology processes based on miRNA analysis
          
          
            
              
                Process -networks
                P-value
                GO-Processes
                P-value
              
            
            
              
                Proteolysis_Ubiquitin-proteasomal proteolysis
                2,95E-03
                Apoptotic process
                1,35E-07
              
              
                Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus
                6,19E-03
                Programmed cell death
                2,23E-07
              
              
                Cell adhesion_Leucocyte chemotaxis
                1,51E-02
                Cellular response to stress
                2,63E-07
              
              
                Cytoskeleton_Regulation of cytoskeleton rearrangement
                1,64E-02
                Regulation of molecular function
                1,21E-06
              
              
                Cell adhesion_Synaptic contact
                1,71E-02
                Cell death
                1,48E-06
              
              
                Cell adhesion_Cell junctions
                1,84E-02
                Cellular response to oxidative stress
                1,55E-06
              
              
                Cytoskeleton_Intermediate filaments
                2,89E-02
                Death
                1,68E-06
              
              
                Cytoskeleton_Actin filaments
                3,06E-02
                Cellular protein metabolic process
                1,73E-06
              
              
                Apoptosis_Apoptotic nucleus
                3,99E-02
                Cellular protein modification process
                2,47E-06
              
              
                Reproduction_Progesterone signaling
                4,36E-02
                Protein modification process
                2,47E-06
              
            
          
          
            Corresponding P-values are given for the identified pathways. Pathways analysis was performed using GeneGO on targets genes of the top10 miRNA's of which expression is correlating with gene expression.
          
        
      
      
        MARCKS upregulation
        To confirm the upregulation of MARCKS in BTZ-resistant leukemia cell lines at the protein level, Western blot analysis was performed as described previously [29]. Figure 4A shows a marked 500 fold upregulation of MARCKS in CEM/BTZ200 cells as compared to parental CEM cells. Consistently, a 60 fold upregulation was found in the previously described BTZ-resistant AML cells (THP-1/BTZ200) [32] as compared to THP-1/WT (Figure 4A). Remarkably, MARCKS was also upregulated in the recently established CEM and THP-1 (1500 fold and 5 fold respectively) sublines with acquired resistance to the immunoproteasome inhibitor PR-924 [42] and a CEM subline (630 fold) with acquired resistance to the proteasome inhibitor salinosporamide A (marizomib) [41] (Figure 4B). Next to MARCKS expression, levels of phosphorylated MARCKS were examined in CEM/WT and CEM/BT200 cells. Notably, CEM/BTZ200 cells expressed a low basal level of phosphorylated MARCKS, which was inducible upon stimulation of cells with PMA and only partially blocked (35% pMARCKS reduction) by treatment with MANS [57] (Figure 4C).
        
          Figure 4
          
            (A) MARCKS protein expression of CEM and THP-1 cells and their BTZ resistant sublines CEM/BTZ200 and THP-1/BTZ200. In addition, the CEM/BTZ200 cultured in absence of BTZ for several months (CEM/BTZ-200) is also included. Western blot analysis of MARCKS (green) and β-actin (red) as a loading control, (B) Ratio of the quantification of MARCKS protein expression (β-actin normalized) of proteasome inhibitor (PR924 and Marizomib) resistant THP-1 and CEM cells relative to their parental cells. (C) Basal levels of phosphorylated MARCKS expression in CEM/WT and CEM/BTZ cells before and after incubation with PMA (50 nM for 1 hour,), and a combination of PMA and RNS (1 hour 100 nM) or MANS (1 hour 100 μM).
          
          
        
      
      
        Vesicle-mediated ubiquitin exocytosis
        MARCKS protein was previously shown to be involved in multiple exocytosis pathways [58], e.g. mucin secretion [59], mast cell degranulation [60] and membrane targeting of plasmalemmal precursor vesicles during axon development [61]. Since gene expression profiling studies for CEM/BTZ cells (Figure 3) revealed that apart from MARCKS, several other genes involved in exocytosis, mostly cytoskeleton rearrangement genes, were also upregulated, we hypothesized that vesicle-mediated export of accumulated ubiquitinated proteins contributes to BTZ resistance through bypassing the proteasome and the UPR. To explore this hypothesis we first investigated whether or not the ubiquitinated proteins co-localized with MARCKS in vesicles in BTZ-resistant sublines. We subsequently determined the secretion of vesicles by BTZ-resistant sublines by following the uptake of vesicles by recipient HeLa cells after 24 hour exposure to supernatant derived from BTZ-resistant sublines. Figure 5A depicts the results of the background staining in the untreated parental CEM/WT showing hardly any MARCKS protein and moderate levels of ubiquitin. After 24 hour exposure of CEM/BTZ7 cells to 30 nM BTZ, MARCKS was upregulated when compared to parental CEM/WT cells. Moreover, ubiquitin was increased, partly in vesicular structures, and partly as a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution. CEM/BTZ200 cells exposed to 400 nM BTZ displayed a clear co-localization of ubiquitin with MARCKS mostly in vesicle-like structures (Figure 5A and Supplementary Figure S4). Of note, co-localization was not observed with phosphorylated MARCKS (not shown). After exposure of HeLa cells to supernatant of CEM/WT cells we performed immunocytochemical staining to detect possible ubiquitin-containing vesicles (Figure 5B). These vesicles were not identified in HeLa cells exposed to supernatants of any of the untreated CEM/WT or BTZ-resistant sublines. When CEM/BTZ7 cells were exposed to 7 nM BTZ, a drug concentration on which they normally thrive, no uptake of vesicles was noted in HeLa cells. However, when CEM/BTZ7 cells were more stringently stressed with 30 nM of BTZ, uptake of ubiquitin-containing vesicles started to appear; the most pronounced uptake of ubiquitin-containing vesicles by HeLa cells was observed after the addition of a supernatant of CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with 400 nM BTZ. Further support to the hypothesis that the secretion of ubiquitin is indeed vesicle-mediated, was achieved by PKH67 staining. Figure 5C shows co-localization of ubiquitin and PKH in CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 after treatment with 30 nM and 400 nM BTZ, respectively. Moreover, when supernatants of these cell cultures were added to HeLa cells, co-localization of ubiquitin and PKH was observed in recipient cells (Figure 5D), indicating the uptake of ubiquitin-containing vesicles. No uptake was seen in untreated WT and BTZ-resistant cells. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that the ER stress that is normally observed after aggresome formation of aggregated ubiquitinated proteins is circumvented in BTZ-resistant CEM cells by exocytosis of vesicles containing the aggregated ubiquitinated proteins.
        
          Figure 5
          
            Fluorescence microscopy of vesicles staining in WT and BTZ-resistant CEM cells, primary patient samples, and HeLa cells
            (A) MARCKS and ubiquitin protein expression in CEM/WT cells, CEM/BTZ7 cells treated with 30 nM BTZ for 24 hours and CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with 400 nM BTZ for 24 hours. Left panel: DAPI nuclear staining (Blue), ubiquitin (Green), and MARCKS (Red), right panel: level of co-localization of MARCKS with ubiquitin as calculated by the SlideBook microscope software as depicted in blue (normal) to magenta (strong co-localization). Single channel images are shown in Supplementary Figure S4. (B) Ubiquitin (green) and DAPI (blue) staining in HeLa cells after 24 hour incubation with the supernatants of cultures of CEM/WT, CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells untreated or treated with the indicated concentrations of BTZ for 1 hour. (C) PKH labeling and ubiquitin protein expression in CEM/WT cells, CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with the abovementioned concentrations of BTZ for 24 hours. DAPI nuclear staining (Blue), PKH (Green), and ubiquitin (Red) and level of colocalization of MARCKS with ubiquitin as calculated by the SlideBook microscope software as depicted in blue to magenta (Right panel). (D) Ubiquitin (red) and PKH (green) staining in HeLa cells after 24 hour incubation with the supernatants of cultures of CEM/WT, CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells untreated or treated with the indicated concentrations of BTZ. Calculated co-localization is depicted in yellow. (E) Ubiquitin (green) and MARCKS (red) staining in a primary ALL patient samples, one sensitive to BTZ (LC50: BTZ 6 nM) and one resistant to BTZ (LC50 BTZ: 262 nM) (F) without and after incubation with low concentration (7 nM) or high concentration of BTZ (400 nM). In the merge figure, the co-localization of the two proteins is shown in yellow. The right top of the figures depict a quantification using a line scan through the corresponding area of interest (α and β).
          
          
        
        To confirm these findings for primary patient samples, we selected a pediatric ALL patient displaying ex vivo sensitivity to BTZ (LC50: 6 nM, Figure 5) and compared it to a BTZ-resistant patient sample (LC50: 262 nM). Figure 5E and 5F show MARCKS and ubiquitin expression in these leukemic cells after 24 h exposure to a low dose (7 nM) and a high dose (400 nM) of BTZ. At low BTZ concentrations, the sensitive patient sample readily shows high ubiquitin and MARCKS expression with some co-localization. When this sample was incubated with high concentration of BTZ, vitality of the cells was heavily compromised along with diffuse staining of both proteins. The BTZ-resistant patient sample exposed to a low dose of BTZ shows some diffuse upregulation of ubiquitin as well as MARCKS expression. When this sample was incubated with 400 nM BTZ, ubiquitin and MARCKS show clear co-localization in small vesicular structures inside as well as outside the cell. The level of co-localization is quantified in the corresponding line scan. Together, these data show that the phenomenon of ubiquitin exocytosis by BTZ-exposed cells is also observed in primary patient samples.
      
      
        MARCKS and BTZ resistance
        We assessed whether PMA-stimulation of MARCKS phosphorylation or inhibition of MARCKS phosphorylation by either the inhibitory peptide MANS [62] or inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) activity by staurosporine or UCN01 had an impact on BTZ sensitivity in CEM/BTZ200 cells. However, neither of these conditions appeared to alter BTZ sensitivity (Supplementary Figure S3; (A); BTZ dose response curve after PMA stimulation or MANS inhibition; (B) co-incubation with a concentration range of UCN-01 or (C) staurosporine). Moreover, siRNA knockdown of MARCKS by 56% (Supplementary Figure S3D) did not influence BTZ sensitivity (Supplementary Figure S3E; BTZ dose response curve after MARCKS siRNA). These data do not support a causal role of MARCKS in the described exocytosis mechanism and show that partial knockdown of MARCKS is insufficient to restore BTZ sensitivity.
      
      
        Clinical prognostic value of MARCKS expression
        Given the overexpression of MARCKS in BTZ-resistant leukemia cells, we explored whether or not MARCKS overexpression may serve as predictive marker of BTZ unresponsiveness in clinical samples of acute leukemia patients. To this end, we examined primary leukemic specimens of patients from the phase II childhood refractory/relapsed ALL trial (AALL07P1 study, NCT00873093) in which BTZ is administered in two intensive re-induction regimens containing vincristine, prednisone, PEG-asparaginase, doxorubicin or cyclophosphamide and etoposide followed by methotrexate treatment. In these pretreatment samples we determined MARCKS expression levels using Western blot analysis and explored the correlation with the clinical response [Complete remission (CR) or no complete remission (No-CR)]. Figure 6 shows MACRKS expression in the CR and no-CR groups (β-actin and CEM/WT normalized). Twelve out of 30 patient specimens (40%) in the CR group did not show MARCKS expression when compared to 4 out of 14 (29%) in the no-CR group. MARCKS expression in the CR group was lower as compared with no-CR group (median 13.4 vs 50.3), with a trend for statistical significance (P = 0.073).
        
          Figure 6
          
            Pre-treatment MARCKS protein expression (Western blot) in primary ALL samples stratified according to response to BTZ-containing treatment (Complete remission (CR) after induction chemotherapy vs no CR)
            Data are presented after normalization to β-actin. For both groups, the mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) is depicted.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      The current study reports a novel mechanism of exocytosis-mediated extrusion of vesicle-like structures containing ubiquitinated proteins in BTZ-resistant CEM leukemia cells as a novel modality to overcome proteolytic stress over a broad range of cytotoxic BTZ concentrations. MARCKS protein was identified as a BTZ resistance biomarker associated with the intracellular emergence of these vesicle-like structures. Furthermore, ubiquitin-containing vesicles from supernatants of BTZ-treated resistant CEM/BTZ cells were taken up by HeLa cells, hence confirming actual exocytosis of the ubiquitin-containing vesicles. Thus, through exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins, the proteasomal load is decreased during proteasome inhibition, leading to cell survival. As proof of principle, this phenomenon was confirmed in two primary ALL patient samples. To our knowledge, this is the first report showing an association between resistance to proteasome inhibitors and exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins.
      The concept of disposal of abundant ubiquitinated proteins is supported by our gene expression profiling and miRNA data. It is well established that accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins as a result of proteasome inhibition induces an unfolded protein response (UPR) in several tumor models [6, 14, 63–65]. Pathway analysis of BTZ-treated CEM/WT cells also showed enrichment for unfolded protein response and ER-stress pathways. Interestingly, upon BTZ exposure, BTZ-resistant leukemia cell lines showed a major reduction of active protein stress-related pathways, indicating a resistance mechanism circumventing UPR. This phenomenon has also been found to be reduced in BTZ-resistant mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) [66] and multiple myeloma [67, 68]. Apart from stress-related pathways, correlation of miRNA expression with gene expression identified cytoskeleton-associated pathways as being altered in BTZ-resistant CEM cells (Table 2). This latter pathway is involved in transport of vesicles, hence lending further support to the exocytosis hypothesis (reviewed in [69]). In addition, pan-genomic profiling of CEM/BTZ cells confirmed the genetic basis of the previously reported upregulated expression of mutated PSMB5 (β5) as a mechanism of BTZ resistance [29].
      Apart from proteasomal degradation, the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) pathway and autophagy have been described in transport and selective removal of ubiquitinated proteins. In the ESCRT pathway, membrane proteins are taken up in endosomes and fuse with lysosomes resulting in the degradation of its content [70]. However, since ubiquitin is removed from membrane proteins before endocytosis through the ESCRT, ubiquitin-containing vesicles would not be present. Hence, this mechanism is not likely to be involved in the BTZ-resistant CEM cells.
      Secondly, under conditions of proteasome protein overload or energy deprivation, proteins and intact organelles can be degraded by lysosomes through autophagy [71]. In the context of proteasome inhibition or overload, autophagy of ubiquitinated protein aggregates is of interest [72, 73]. While autophagosomes normally fuse with lysosomes resulting in degradation of the aggresome, exocytosis of phagosomes has been opted in a process called exophagy [74]. Although increased autophagy, mediated by increased HSPB8 expression, has recently been demonstrated to be involved in BTZ resistance in multiple myeloma cells [20], we found no increased activity of this pathway in BTZ-resistant CEM cells. Our GEP data showed no upregulation of autophagy-related proteins, including HSPB8, while even a downregulation of the autophagy initiator SQSTM1 was seen (data not shown). In addition, the autophagy marker LC3B was not increased in BTZ-resistant cell lines as determined by Western blot and immunocytochemistry (data not shown) and hence does not explain the phenomenon of vesicular exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins we describe in this paper.
      Buschow et al. [75] recently showed exosomes that were relatively enriched for ubiquitinated proteins as compared to total cell lysates [76]. Although their model was postulated, the exact mechanism of biogenesis and release of these exosomes was not elucidated. Since autophagy/exophagy and an ESCRT-dependent pathway are not supported by our data, BTZ- resistant CEM cells may have adopted the activation of an ESCRT-independent pathway as has been described by Buschow et al. By PKH labeling, ubiquitin-containing vesicles/exosomes emerging in CEM/BTZ cells during increasing BTZ concentrations were characterized by double membrane structures which remained intact during cellular release, interaction and accumulation in HeLa recipient cells. As such, these cells which are proteasome activity proficient have the capacity to process polyubiquitinated proteins.
      Our GEP studies identified the MARCKS gene to be highly overexpressed in BTZ-resistant CEM cells. The association of MARCKS protein with BTZ resistance was originally identified by Micallef et al. [77] in MM RPMI 8226-R5 cells with acquired resistance to the farnesyltransferase inhibitor R115777 and 3-fold cross-resistant to BTZ [78]. Unlike CEM/BTZ cells, RPMI8226-R5 cells had no mutations in the PSBM5 gene. Recently, Yang et al. [79] showed that upregulation of phosphorylated MARCKS in three BTZ-resistant multiple myeloma cell lines as well as in primary resistant MM specimens. They showed that low levels of BTZ resistance achieved through MARCKS regulating the SKP2/p27Kip1 cell cycle pathway [79, 80]. Consistently, in leukemia cells we show here the upregulation of MARCKS protein in CEM/BTZ cells as well as CEM cells with acquired resistance to new generation proteasome inhibitors Marizomib and PR924 [41, 42]. However, unlike MM cells, in leukemia cells we noted marginal basal levels of MARCKS phosphorylation suggesting no major involvement in leukemia cells that were selected for BTZ resistance. Notably, high levels of unphosphorylated MARCKS may be concordant with other well established functions of MARCKS in secretion processes [58–62]. Specifically, membrane-bound unphosphorylated MARCKS, rather than cytoplasmic phosphorylated MARCKS, can be a partner protein in facilitating transport of vesicles along the cytoskeletal axis and their secretion [61, 81]. This function would be consistent with co-localization studies of intracellular MARCKS and ubiquitin-containing vesicles and MARCKS not being associated with secreted vesicles. To this end, our encouraging preliminary correlations of MARCKS expression and BTZ response in pediatric acute leukemia patients warrant follow up study in a large cohort of BTZ-treated ALL.
      In conclusion, BTZ resistant T-ALL CEM cells displaying upregulation of mutant PSMB5, have a coexisting novel mechanism of exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins, hence circumventing UPR (Figure 7). Both mechanisms are readily observed in resistance to several proteasome inhibitors indicating common resistance adaptation to proteasome inhibitors rather than limited to BTZ only. Further research is warranted to determine whether or not MARCKS is a clinical biomarker which can predict proteasome inhibitor resistance and may aid to select patients for BTZ- containing treatment strategies.
      
        Figure 7
        
          Summary model of the involvement of MARCKS and vesicular exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins in BTZ-resistant leukemia cells
          CEM/BTZ cells harboring PSMB5 mutations (indicated by *) have a diminished capacity of inhibition of proteasomal catalytic activity by BTZ [29, 31]. Upon exposure of CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells to BTZ concentrations that block PSMB5 activity (30 nM and 400 nM BTZ, respectively), these cells accumulate polyubiquitinated proteins. This coincides with the biogenesis of vesicle-like structures incorporating these ubiquitinated proteins. These vesicles then traffic along actin/cytoskeleton axis to the plasma membrane with MARCKS protein serving as partner protein. Here myristoylated-anchored MARCKS facilitates exocytosis of vesicles which subsequently can be taken up by recipient (HeLa) cells. Proficient proteasomal activity in recipient cells would allow degradation of ubiquitinated proteins from BTZ-resistant cells. Through a mechanism of exocytosis-mediated extrusion of vesicles containing ubiquitinated proteins, BTZ-resistant cells can overcome proteolytic stress over a broad range of BTZ concentrations.
        
        
      
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Antibodies and chemicals
        Anti-β-actin (clone c4) mouse mAb was purchased from Boehringer Mannheim (Almere, The Netherlands), α-Tubulin (B-7) mouse mAb and Ubiquitin (P4D1) mouse mAb from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA), MARCKS (D88D11) XP® Rabbit mAb #5607 and phospho-MARCKS (D13D2) (S159/S163) Rabbit mAb #11992S from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA), the IRDye infrared secondary labeled antibodies from LI-COR Biosciences (Lincoln, NE, USA) and the Polyclonal goat anti-mouse Immunoglobulins/FITC (Goat F(ab')2) from Dako (Glostrup, Denmark).
        Trypsin was purchased from Lonza (Basel, Switzerland), PKH67 labeling kit, paraformaldehyde (PFA), Triton-X100, 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and phorbol-myristic acid (PMA) from Sigma-Aldrich (Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands). BTZ was obtained via the VUmc hospital pharmacy department. MARCKS inhibitory peptide (MANS) was from Genemed Synthesis Inc (San Antonio, Texas, USA).
      
      
        Human tumor cell lines and patient samples
        The generation, cell culture conditions and mutation status of the PSMB5 gene of human leukemic CCRF-CEM cells and BTZ-resistant sublines, selected at 7, 100 and 200 nM BTZ, was previously described [29]. HeLa cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). Pre-treatment primary leukemic specimens were obtained from patients included in the phase II childhood refractory/relapsed ALL trial (AALL07P1 study, NCT00873093). After thawing the vials blast percentage was determined using May-Grunwald/Giemsa staining. Inclusion criteria for analysis was a blast percentage of > 20%. The samples were snap-frozen for MARCKS protein analysis.
      
      
        Karyotyping
        Karyotyping was performed on GTG banded metaphase cells and described according ISCN 2013 [82].
      
      
        Microarray comparative genome hybridization (arrayCGH) for DNA copy number analysis
      
      
        Sample preparation and DNA isolation
        Prior to DNA isolation, BTZ-resistant sublines were cultured in bortezomib-free medium for a week. DNA isolation was performed using column-based method (QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, Westburg, Leusden, The Netherlands). DNA quantity and quality were determined spectrophotometrically (Nanodrop, Wilmington, USA), only including samples with an A260/230 ratio above 1.8. DNA from Kreatech (Megapool reference DNA female, EA-100F) was used as reference DNA. Labeling and hybridization, and data analysis was performed according to the methods described by Haan et al. [83] In short, after DNA isolation, labeling (Enzo Genomic DNA Labeling kit, Enzo Life Sciences, Raamsdonksveer, The Netherlands) and purification were undertaken (QIAGEN MinElute PCR Purification Kit, Westburg, Leusden, The Netherlands) with an elution volume of 2 × 10.5 μl, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cy3- and Cy5-labelled DNA samples were combined with Cot-1 DNA (Invitrogen, Breda, The Netherlands) and blocking agent in hybridization buffer (Agilent Technologies).
      
      
        Hybridization
        Hybridization on an Agilent SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray 4 × 180 K array the design of which can be found in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [84] platform GPL8687 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) was performed for 24 h at 65°C. Microarrays were scanned using the Agilent Technologies Scanner G2505C (Agilent Technologies), and scans were quantified using the Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 10.5.1.1; Agilent Technologies, protocol CGH_105_Dec08) using default settings. The oligonucleotides were mapped along the genome according to the NCBI36/hg18 built (March 2006).
      
      
        DNA copy number data pre-processing
        Genome data analysis was performed using R Version 2.6.2. The aCGH profiles were dewaved [85], and median was normalized. Segmentation was performed using the Bioconductor R-package DNAcopy version 1.22.1 [86] and subsequently DNA copy number calls for loss, normal, gain or amplification were made using the using R-package CGHcall version 2.8.0 [87]. Accuracy of normalization, segmentation and calling was verified by visual inspection using Nexus Copy Number (version 5, www.BioDiscovery.com). Raw and normalized data are online available on the GEO [84] platform GSE74633. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74633).
      
      
        Gene expression microarray
      
      
        Sample preparation
        Wild type CCRF-CEM cells were harvested for RNA isolation after 24 hours of incubation with 7 nM BTZ (CEM/WT_BTZ). The several BTZ resistant sublines were cultured without BTZ for 7 days, prior to a 24 hour exposure on the BTZ concentration on which they normally thrive (CEM/BTZ7 with 7 nM, CEM/BTZ100 with 100 nM and the CEM/BTZ200 with 200 nM of BTZ). Expression ratios were calculated using the untreated CEM/WT as a reference. CEM/BTZ-200, referring to CEM/BTZ200 cells cultured in absence of BTZ for several weeks, were included as an additional reference but were not exposed to BTZ prior to gene expression array experiments.
      
      
        RNA isolation and quality control
        Total RNA was isolated using RNAbee (AMSBiotechnology), according to the protocol provided by AMSBiotechnology. Nanodrop ND-1000 was used for accurate nucleic acid concentration measurements. Quality control was performed using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) in combination with the Agilent RNA 6000 NanoLabChip kit to visualize and quantify the amount of RNA. Samples with a RNA Integrity Number (RIN) of > 7, concentration of > 5 μg/ml and two distinct peaks corresponding to the 28S and 18S ribosomal RNA bands at a ratio of 1.8–2.0 as seen on Agilent electrophorogram were used.
      
      
        Expression microarray
        After RNA isolation, labeling (labeling performed with Agilent Low RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification Kit, Agilent Technologies) and purification were undertaken (RNeasy Mini Kit, Agilent Technologies). Equal amounts of Cy3-CTP and Cy5-CTP labeled samples were hybridized to Agilent 4 × 44 K Whole Human Genome arrays (Agilent Technologies) the design of which can be found in the GEO [84] platform GPL4133 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Hybridization was carried out for 17 h with rotation at 65°C in a hybridization oven. Microarrays were scanned using the Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner (Agilent Technologies), and scans were quantified using the Agilent Feature Extraction software (Agilent Technologies).
      
      
        Expression data pre-processing
        Raw expression data generated by the Feature Extraction software were imported into the R statistical environment using the LIMMA package [88] in bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org). After background correction, the intensity distributions within and between arrays were normalized using the Loess [89] and quantile [90] algorithm, respectively. Raw and normalized data are online available on the GEO [84] platform GSE74634. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74634).
      
      
        miRNA expression array
        The miRNA expression profiles of the samples were profiled using Agilent human miRNA Microarray V2 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Each array contained 60-mer probes representing 723 human and 76 human viral miRNAs from the miRBase (Version 10.1) the design of which can be found in the GEO [84] platform GPL8227 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo). The array experiment was carried out using Agilent miRNA system protocol v2.0. Briefly, each RNA sample was labeled with Cyanine3-pCp and hybridized to the Agilent human miRNA microarray using the miRNA Complete Labeling and Hyb Kit (Agilent p/n 5190–0456). The slide was washed using Gene Expression Wash Buffer kit (Agilent p/n 5188–5327), and then scanned using an Agilent DNA microarray scanner. The raw miRNA expression data were extracted from the scanned image using Agilent Feature Extraction Software V10. Coefficient of variation (CV) within groups of replicate probes was used as a quality control measure to reflect the intra-array reproducibility. The raw expression values of miRNA were imported into Agilent GeneSpring Software V10 for normalization and identification of differentially expressed miRNAs between bortezomib-resistant and wild-type cells.
      
      
        Data analysis
        After normalization as described above, basic data handling and data preparation for further analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel 2010, clustering and subsequent visualization was performed using Cluster 3.0 and Treeview [91]. GO gene annotation was obtained from Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [92], pathway analysis and gene set enrichment analysis were performed using GeneGoMetacore (http://www.genego.com/metacore.php) and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA, Broad institute) [93, 94]. Integrated analyses of DNA copy number, gene expression microarray and miRNA expression data were performed as described by Menezes et al. [95] and Van Iterson et al. [96].Raw and normalized data are online available on the GEO [84] platform GSE74632. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74632).
      
      
        Immunocytochemistry
        Cytospins were fixed for 10 min with 4% of paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS pH 7.4, permeabilized for 10 min with 0.1% of Triton-X100 in PBS and blocked with 10% of fetal calf serum (FCS) in PBS for 1 hour. Primary (anti-MARCKS diluted 1:50, anti-ubiquitin 1:20) and secondary antibodies (diluted 1:100) were incubated for 1 hour each at 4°C. Nuclei were stained with 300 nM 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images of the cell line experiments were obtained using the Zeiss Axiovert 200M Marianas™ inverted microscope connected to a cooled Cooke Sensicam SVGA CCD camera [Cooke Co., Tonawanda, NY] as previously described by Wojtuszkiewicz et al. [97]. DAPI, Alexa 488 and Alexa 647 were irradiated with a pulsed laser at 405 nM, 499 nm and 654 nm respectively. A 63× oil objective with NA 1.4 was used to image the sample. Data collected were processed using SlideBook™ software (SlideBook™ version 5.5.2.0 [Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Denver, CO]). The data acquisition protocol included optical planes to obtain 3-D definition.
        Confocal scanning laser microscopy was performed on a Leica TCS SP8 STED 3X (Leica Microsystems) as previously described by Wojtuszkiewicz et al. [97]. Abberior STAR 580 and Alexa 647 were irradiated with a pulsed white light laser at 588 nm and 654 nm respectively. A 100× oil objective with NA 1.4 was used to image the sample. Detection of the fluorescent signal was performed with gated Hybrid Detectors. Finally, the images were deconvolved using Huygens Professional (Scientific Volume Imaging).
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
    
  
        Background: Improved healthcare and recent breakthroughs in technology have substantially reduced cancer mortality rates worldwide. Recent advancements in next-generation sequencing (NGS) have allowed genomic analysis of the human transcriptome. Now, using NGS we can further look into small non-coding regions of RNAs (sncRNAs) such as microRNAs (miRNAs), Piwi-interacting-RNAs (piRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and small nuclear/nucleolar RNAs (sn/snoRNAs) among others. Recent studies looking at sncRNAs indicate their role in important biological processes such as cancer progression and predict their role as biomarkers for disease diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy. Results: In the present study, we data mined publically available small RNA sequencing data from colorectal tissue samples of eight matched patients (benign, tumor, and metastasis) and remapped the data for various small RNA annotations. We identified aberrant expression of 13 miRNAs in tumor and metastasis specimens [tumor vs benign group (19 miRNAs) and metastasis vs benign group (38 miRNAs)] of which five were upregulated, and eight were downregulated, during disease progression. Pathway analysis of aberrantly expressed miRNAs showed that the majority of miRNAs involved in colon cancer were also involved in other cancers. Analysis of piRNAs revealed six to be over-expressed in the tumor vs benign cohort and 24 in the metastasis vs benign group. Only two piRNAs were shared between the two cohorts. Examining other types of small RNAs [sn/snoRNAs, mt_rRNA, miscRNA, nonsense mediated decay (NMD), and rRNAs] identified 15 sncRNAs in the tumor vs benign group and 104 in the metastasis vs benign group, with only four others being commonly expressed. Conclusion: In summary, our comprehensive analysis on publicly available small RNA-seq data identified multiple differentially expressed sncRNAs during colorectal cancer progression at different stages compared to normal colon tissue. We speculate that deciphering and validating the roles of sncRNAs may prove useful in colorectal cancer prognosis, diagnosis, and therapy.
      
    
      Introduction
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third-most common cancer diagnosed in the United States in both men and woman, and the American Cancer Society estimates 134,490 new cases and 49,190 deaths in 2016 1. Despite recent improvements in cancer care and awareness, incidences are still steadily growing. Although colonoscopy has allowed for earlier detection, a better understanding of tumor biology and prognosis are still needed. Recently, advances in RNA sequencing have increased the understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind CRC. Changes in whole transcriptome profiles seem to underlie specific phenotypes. Small non-coding RNAs consist of 17-120 nucleotides, in their mature form 2 and play crucial roles in the development and progression of cancer. Innovative technologies have allowed researchers to focus on the role of small RNAs in disease progression which may contribute to the development of novel therapeutic targets. An increasing number of published studies have focused on miRNAs (17-22 nucleotides) 3, piRNAs (26-33 nucleotides) 4, small nucleolar RNAs (70-120 nucleotides) 5, and lncRNAs (>200 nucleotides) 6. Using whole genome sequencing, present studies aim to understand the functions and transcriptional regulation of miRNA genes. Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are one of the largest classes of the small non-coding RNAs family, and have been implicated in DNA methylation and post transcriptional-mediated repression of transposable elements 7. However, other hypothesized functions of piRNAs remain largely unexplored 8. Similarly, limited functional information is available for long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 9. Likewise, small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) in eukaryotes consist of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), which carry out the fundamental role of ribosomal (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA) modification and processing 10. Two classes of snoRNAs, C/D and box H/ACA snoRNAs, have been shown to differ in sequence and structure 10.
      In the present study, we carried out in-depth data analysis to identify the transcriptomic expression “signatures” of small RNAs from benign, tumor, and metastatic tissue samples from colorectal cancer patients, using existing datasets. We thoroughly analyzed the most predominant ncRNA expression in each sample type along with signaling pathways for possible biomarker development and identification of therapeutic targets in colorectal cancer.
    
    
      Materials and Methods
      
        Samples and data assembly
        Colorectal cancer (CRC) small RNA sequencing (eight matched patients; 8 benign, 8 tumors, and 8 metastasis) datasets (project no: PRJNA201245; GEO: GSE46622) were downloaded from the NIH bioproject 11. Detailed clinical information of patients was previously mentioned by Rohr et al 11. Raw files were downloaded as sequence raw archive (SRA) files that were converted to FASTQ using SRA tool Kit version 2.5.7. Data was assembled using PartekFlow® software, version 5.0 (Partek, Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). Converted FASTQ files were uploaded to the PartekFlow® server and remapped to human genome hg19 (UCSC Genome Browser). Transcript abundances were determined and expression values were represented using reads per kilobases of exon model per million mapped reads (RPKM). All small RNA expression RPKM values >1 and representing at least 10% of the samples were considered robustly expressed and used for further analysis. Expression matrices were aligned to clinical pathologic features in order to compare miRNA, piRNA, lncRNA, and snRNA levels for association with specific CRC phenotypes. Statistical analysis between benign, tumor, and metastasis groups were carried out using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test followed by false discovery rate (FDR) correction through the Benjamin-Hochberg method, with the default p value <0.05 considered statistically significant 12.
      
      
        Assembly of miRNA, piRNA, lncRNA and snoRNA annotations
        Small RNA sequencing data was trimmed and aligned to the whole human genome (hg19), and BWA-0.7.12 aligner (BWA-MEM) with a few modifications (mismatch penalty 2, gap open penalty 6, clipping penalty 4 and alignment score cutoff 15) for short read mapping 13. miRNAs were annotated from miRBase version 21 (http://www.mirbase.org/), which contains more than 1900 high confidence miRNAs 14. piRNA data was generated and annotated from piRBase (regulatoryrna.org/database/piRNA), which is manually curated with a focus on piRNA functional analysis 15. lncRNAs were quantified using reference annotation LNCipedia (http://www.lncipedia.org) version 3.1, downloaded from all coordinates relative to the hg19 reference genome 16. Total small RNA (including miRNA, piRNA, snRNA, mtRNA, snoRNA, piRNA, tRF3, tRF5, tRNA, rRNA) was annotated following download of GenCode version 21 (www.GenCodegenes.org), which provides comprehensive, up-to-date information on human small non-coding RNAs, with specific regard to small nuclear and nucleolar RNAs.
      
      
        Biological processes and gene network visualization: MetaCore
        To investigate biological pathway interactions of small RNA expression, we used MetaCore pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes (Thomson Reuters, New York, NY) 13, 17, to delineate functional gene networks. This was based on differentially regulated gene lists with p<0.05 from each group (tumor vs benign, metastasis vs benign, metastasis vs tumor) as input (Data analyzed by Gene Arrays, New York, USA) to generate disease biomarkers and GO terms.
      
      
        Statistical Analysis
        All data sets were subjected to paired student's t test with “p” value <0.05 being considered statistically significant. Furthermore, the Benjamini and Hochberg multiple testing adjustment method was applied to all small RNA sequencing studies and pathway analysis.
      
    
    
      Results and Discussion
      
        Analysis of miRNA sequencing of colorectal cancer tissue samples
        To identify miRNA differential expression in colorectal cancer patient-matched tissue samples, data was downloaded from the GEO series accession number GSE46622. Using PartekFlow software miRNA analysis, we identified 19 miRNAs in the tumor vs benign cohort, and 38 miRNAs in the metastasis vs benign cohort, that were statistically significant. Top upregulated/downregulated miRNAs were determined in both tumor, metastasis stages (Figures 1A and 1B, Table 1), and hierarchical clustering/Venn diagram was compared for each group (Figure 1C). Our findings were very similar to those originally published by Rohr et al 11, in which one of the top downregulated microRNAs was miR-1. It is downregulated during disease progression from tumor (4-fold) to metastasis (8-fold, Figure 1B), along with miR-145, miR-378a, miR-143 and miR-497 commonly regulated in both tumor and metastasis samples. Additionally, miR-31, miR-183, miR-135b, miR224 and miR-584 were upregulated with disease progression (Figure 1A, 1B and 1C). All of the miRNAs with fold change were listed in Table 1. miR-1 downregulation is consistent with other studies that showed its downregulation in colorectal cancers 18. Several other miRNAs were expressed at low levels in normal tissue, strongly upregulated in tumors, and continued to be further upregulated in late stage (metastatic) CRC. miR-31 (9.3-fold), miR-183 (7.5-fold), miR-135b (6-fold) and miR-224 (3.6-fold), were all significantly expressed in metastasis in the sequencing data, in agreement with other studies demonstrating the same expression pattern in CRC and other disease states 19-21. Specifically, miR-31 expression in benign samples was negligible and increased significantly with disease progression, this data is similar to previous reports showing increased presence of miR-31 in several cancer types with metastasis 22.
        Once miRNA gene expression was determined, we performed biological pathway analysis, using MetaCore software (previous known as GeneGo; v6.25), to identify candidate “molecular signatures.” Pathway analysis on differentially expressed benign, tumor, and metastasis samples were obtained. As expected, most of the affected miRNAs were involved in cell regulation, cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis of colorectal cancer (Figure 2A). Gene ontology (Figure 2B) and disease by biomarkers (Figure 2C) clearly showed that most of the miRNAs were known to be involved in colorectal and/or other cancer types. Regulation and proliferation pathway analysis data of miRNAs in tumor vs benign and metastasis vs benign cancer samples, showed most of the miRs were involved in colon cancer and cellular migration (Figures 3A-3E). We further viewed the network analysis of the miRNAs that were involved in signaling pathways. We observed three major pathways were commonly affected in the tumor and metastasis groups (Figures 3F-3H) and only specific to the metastasis group (Figures 3I-3K).
      
      
        Differentially expressed piRNAs in colorectal cancer tissue samples
        Piwi-interacting RNAs are the largest class of non-coding RNAs 23 recently shown to play important roles in cancer progression. They also represent a third class of small RNA silencers (other two classes are miRNAs and siRNAs) that form RNA-protein complexes by interacting with piwi-proteins. These are required for both epigenetic and post-transcriptional gene silencing of retrotransposons and other genetic elements in germ line cells, particularly during spermatogenesis 24. We remapped aligned small RNA sequenced data with piRBase annotation and identified six piRNAs (including two piRNAs with alternative transcripts) whose expression levels were statistically significant (p<0.05; Figure 4A, and group wise hierarchical clustering with Venn diagram in Figure 4B). Two piRNAs were commonly upregulated in both tumor and metastasis groups. Tumor vs benign group enriched only four piRNAs which piR-hsa-25447 (3-fold), piR-hsa-23992 (3-fold), and piR-hsa-1043 (2.4-fold) were upregulated and the remaining one downregulated [piR-hsa-28876 (2.3-fold)]. In the metastasis vs benign group, 27 piRNAs were enriched (with multiple transcripts) of which 22 were upregulated [Top five: piR-hsa-22842 (22-fold), piR-hsa-23317 (9.5-fold), piR-hsa-26131 (6-fold) piR-hsa-23210.1 (6-fold) and piR-hsa-25447 (5.7-fold) and the remaining five downregulated [piR-hsa-27729 (3.4-fold), piR-hsa-7193.1 (3.4-fold), piR-hsa-7193.2 (3.2-fold) piR-hsa-27729.1 (3-fold) and piR-hsa-27730.1 (2.4-fold)] (All piRNAs were listed in the Table 2). Recently, more attention is being focused on piRNAs in relation to biologic functions and epigenetic involvement of the biomarker for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic use, which still remains largely unknown. Although piRNA detection in cancer correlates with poorer clinical outcomes suggesting a functional role 25, data available so far is not sufficient to entirely discriminate between a 'passenger' role for the ectopic expression versus a 'driver' role in the pathogenesis of these diseases 25. Cancer associated piRNAs are especially upregulated in breast cancer (piR-4987, piR-20365, piR-20485, piR-20582 and piR-932) 26, 27, and gastric cancer (piR-823 and piR651) 28, 29. In kidney cancer both upregulated piRNAs (piR-32051, piR-39894, piR-43607) and down-regulated piRNAs (piR-38756, piR-57125, piR-30924) 30 have been identified. piRNA down-regulation has also been observed in pancreatic cancer (piR-017061) 31, multiple myeloma (piR-823), and lung cancer (piR-L-163) 32.
      
      
        Differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs in colorectal cancer tissue samples
        Long non-coding RNAs, larger than 200 nucleotides 24, are the most recent and least characterized ncRNAs. lncRNAs have tissue-specific expression and are expressed in a regulated manner correlating with distinct gene sets that influence cell function 33. They are also expressed as both tumor suppressors and promoters 34-36. Our small RNA sequencing data was remapped to identify differentially expressed lncRNAs in colorectal cancer samples. It revealed 18 lncRNAs in tumor vs benign, 89 in metastasis vs benign, and 15 in metastasis vs tumor groups being significantly expressed (p<0.05). The top upregulated ones being lnc-SLC47A1-3:1, lnc-RABGGTB-1:6, lnc-RPL17-2:4 and lnc-HHIPL1-3:1 (Figure 5A); and the top downregulated lncRNAs being lnc-ABHD3-1:4, lnc-ABHD3-1:2, lnc-ZNF860-1:1 and lnc-PCYOX1L-2:15 (Figure 5B). Stage wise hierarchical clustering with Venn diagram for both tumor and metastasis groups is illustrated in Figure 5C along with differential expressed lncRNAs listed in the Table 3. lncRNAs are a heterogeneous group of transcripts, with diverse mechanisms and differential expression in many diseases including tumors 35. ABHD3 is an alpha/beta hydrolase protein found in a wide range of enzyme domains whose function remains unknown, and multiple transcripts of this gene were downregulated in tumor and metastasis samples in this study. Further exploration is needed to assess their function in cancer and other diseases.
      
      
        Differentially expressed sn/snoRNAs, mt_rRNA, miscRNA, nonsense mediated decay and rRNAs in colorectal cancer tissue samples
        Small nuclear RNAs, form a class of RNA molecules that localize within the nucleus of eukaryotic cells 24. Their primary function is pre-mRNA processing, for which they are always associated with a set of specific proteins and the complexes are referred to as small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). A subclass of snRNAs called small nucleolar RNAs that localize to the nucleolus are implicated in the maturation of ribosomal and transfer RNA molecules by specific chemical modifications 24. We remapped the aligned reads to the GenCode database, which contains most of the curated small RNAs. We specifically looked at sn/snoRNAs, mt_rRNA, misc_RNA, nonsense mediated decay (NMD) and rRNAs. All the mentioned sncRNAs were significantly upregulated during CRC disease progression (Figure 6A, and stage wise hierarchical clustering with Venn diagram in Figure 6C). In our investigation, nine differential expression genes were noted in the tumor vs benign group, 104 in metastasis vs benign (with multiple transcripts), and 15 in metastasis vs tumor group. This sncRNA cohort included all sn/snoRNAs, mt_rRNA, misc_RNA, NMD and rRNAs, with most belonging to sn/snoRNAs (listed in the Table 4). Increased expression was noted during metastasis, suggesting potential biomarker use in late stage cancers. Previous studies have shown the RNU family of snRNAs to be expressed in pancreatic, colorectal and lung cancers 37 and decreasing after tumor removal by surgery. Recent studies have also shown that the SNHG (small nucleolar RNA host genes) family of snoRNAs plays a crucial role in cancer. For example, Zhang et al., showed upregulation of SNHG1 in hepatocellular carcinoma, affecting tumor suppressor genes such as p53 and others 38, while Zhao et al., showed downregulation of SNHG5 in gastric cancer 39. Conversely, in our study, SNHG12 (two transcripts, 4.2-fold) and SNHG1 (3.4-fold) increased. Other snoRNAs, i.e., snoRD14 (5-fold), snoRD15B (5-fold), snoRD32A (4.7-fold) were only upregulated in the metastasis stage (Table 4). Further validation of identified snRNAs are needed to confirm their biological functions and possible use as biomarkers.
      
    
    
      Conclusions
      High-throughput sequencing technologies have effectively delineated the crucial roles of non-coding RNAs in normal cellular biology and cancer progression. We have identified several small non-coding RNAs which may be involved in the stepwise progression of normal colon tissue to cancer and subsequent metastatic disease. However, their functions are still relatively unknown. Our analysis can provide a comprehensive list of the miRNAs, piRNAs, lncRNAs and sn/snoRNAs specific to each stage with the commonly expressed genes listed in Tables 1-4. Further understanding and validating will allow us to link these distinct small RNAs with the phenotypic traits seen in the evolution of colorectal cancer, thereby offering a potential for biomarker development. Likewise, further understanding of their roles in cancer signaling pathways may represent a novel target for treatment. Detailed analysis of the individual transcriptome can personalize both prognosis and intervention strategies in colorectal cancer.
    
  
        High grade gliomas contribute to most brain tumor mortality. A few studies reported that the immune system affected glioma development, and immune biomarkers helped understand the disease and formulate effective immunotherapy for patients. Currently, no B lymphocyte-based prognostic signature was reported in gliomas. By applying 78 B cell lineage-specific genes, we conducted a whole-genome gene expression analysis in 782 high grade gliomas derived from three independent datasets by Cox regression analysis and risk score method for signature identification, and then used Gene Ontology, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, and other statistical methods for functional annotations of the signature-defined differences. We developed a five B cell-associated gene signature for prognosis of high grade glioma patients, which is independent of clinicopathological and genetic features. The signature identified high risk patients suitable for chemoradiotherapy, whereas low risk patients should rule out chemotherapy with radiotherapy only. We found that tumors of TCGA Mesenchymal subtype and wild type IDH1 were preferentially stratified to the high risk group, which bore strong immunosuppressive microenvironment, while tumors of TCGA Proneural subtype and mutated IDH1 were significantly accumulated to the low risk group, which exhibited less immunosuppressive state. The five B cell-associated gene signature predicts poor survival of high risk patients bearing strong immunosuppression and helps select optimal therapeutic regimens for glioma patients.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Malignant glioma is the most common primary brain tumor and has inevitable local recurrence, thus contributing to a considerable brain tumor-related mortality in adults and children. High grade gliomas (HGGs) (World Health Organization WHO grade III and grade IV) consist of glioblastoma (GBM) (WHO grade IV) and anaplastic gliomas (WHO grade III) including anaplastic astrocytoma (AA), anaplastic oligodendroglioma (AO), and anaplastic oligoastrocytoma (AOA) [1, 2]. The standard therapy for the disease includes surgery, radiotherapy (RT), chemotherapy (CT), and chemoradiotherapy (CRT) [3]. Despite the improvements in these therapies, the median survival of the patients with GBM and anaplastic gliomas is only 15 months and three years respectively [4]. Moreover, highly variable prognosis exists in HGGs such as 3–5% of GBM patients surviving longer than three years, thus hindering precise patient stratification and treatment [5]. This is mainly because of a heterogeneous population of the HGG tumors and their variable microenvironments, which affect tumor progression and patient survival [6].
      Tumor-infiltrating immune cells have been recognized as an essential factor for clinical outcomes of cancer patients [7]. CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte infiltration has been found to be associated with favorable outcomes in many cancer types such as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), glioma, esophageal and rectal cancer [8–11]. However, the tumor-infiltrating immune cells are frequently modulated by the local cellular and soluble components of the tumor microenvironment, resulting in the generation of inhibitory immune cells. Immunosuppressive T regulatory cells (Treg), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), and tumor-associated M2 macrophages are commonly present in the tumor mass, which create the immunosuppressive microenvironment and support tumor growth and progression [12]. Therefore, the intra- and peritumoral presences of immune infiltrates significantly impact patient survival [13].
      B lymphocyte is recently recognized to participate in regulating immune response to murine and human tumors. A subset of B cells, regulatory B cells (Breg), plays an immunosuppressive role in carcinogenesis and becomes a therapeutic target in solid tumors [14, 15]. Some findings also indicate that B cell-mediated immune response or associated tumoral tertiary lymphoid structure is favorable for patient survival in NSCLC and hepatocellular carcinoma [16, 17]. At present, few studies explore the role of tumor-infiltrating B cells in malignant glioma and their impact in clinical outcomes of the patients remains unknown.
      In the study, we applied whole-genome mRNA expression profiles of gliomas and a set of 78 B cell lineage-specific genes to identify a B cell-specific signature for clinical outcomes of HGG patients. We found a five B cell lineage-specific gene signature (four risky genes of BACE2, FCGR2B, ISG20, and SWAP70 and one protective gene of QRSL1), which successfully stratified HGG patients into a high risk group with poorer survival and a low risk group with better outcomes and helped select optimal adjuvant therapies for HGG patients. The findings support the possibility that treatment strategies targeting HGG-infiltrating immunomodulatory cells are therapeutically beneficial.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Identification of a five B cell-associated gene signature for prognosis in high grade gliomas independent of clinicopathological and genetic features
        To identify a B cell-associated gene prognostic signature in gliomas, we first assessed expression patterns of 78 B cell lineage-specific genes among glioma grades by Student's t test and then calculated prognostic values of differentially expressed genes by univariate Cox regression analysis using gene expression profiles of GSE16011 dataset as a training set. Five differentially expressed B cell-specific genes were identified to be significantly associated with overall survival (OS) of HGG patients (P < 0.001, Table 1). The five significant genes were classified into two types of genes: risky and protective genes. Risky and protective genes were defined as ones that had hazard ratios for death greater and less than 1 respectively. Using this definition, we found four risky genes (BACE2, FCGR2B, ISG20, and SWAP70) and one protective gene (QRSL1). To test the predictive power of the five genes as a signature, we developed a risk score formula by using a linear combination of the expression levels of the five genes weighted with their regression coefficients as described in Methods. The risk score for each patient was then calculated in grade II, III, IV, and HGG gliomas. Using the median risk score as the cutoff value, the patients were successfully divided into a high risk group and a low risk group in each grade (Figure 1A–1C, Supplementary Figure S1A). The patients with the high risk score had a shorter median OS than ones with the low risk score especially in HGGs (p < 0.001) (Figure 2A and 2B). Hierarchical clustering of the five gene expression in HGG tumors showed that tumors of high risk patients expressed high levels of the risky genes and a low level of the protective gene (Figure 2C) (p < 0.001). Also the risk gene expression increased and the protective gene expression decreased with increased malignancy of gliomas consistent in the three datasets (Supplementary Figure S2).
        
          Table 1
          
            Five B cell-associated genes were significantly associated with overall survival of HGG patients in GSE16011 dataset
          
          
            
              
                Symbol
                Hazard radio
                95% Confidence interval
                Parametric p value
              
            
            
              
                BACE2
                1.436
                (1.281, 1.609)
                4.90E-10
              
              
                FCGR2B
                1.246
                (1.146, 1.355)
                2.58E-07
              
              
                ISG20
                1.633
                (1.420, 1.879)
                6.29E-12
              
              
                QRSL1
                0.313
                (0.219, 0.448)
                1.75E-10
              
              
                SWAP70
                1.694
                (1.452, 1.975)
                1.83E-11
              
            
          
        
        
          Figure 1
          
            Prognostic value of the five B cell-associated gene signature for glioma patients in training and validation datasets
            Patients in the low risk group showed a better survival than those in the high risk group according to the signature risk score in GSE16011 dataset (A–C), TCGA dataset D–F), and Rembrandt dataset (G–I). L, low risk group; H, high risk group; III, WHO grade III; IV, WHO grade IV; HGGs, high grade gliomas.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 2
          
            Distribution of risk scores of HGGs and OS of their patients based on the five signature genes in the three datasets
            (A) Risk score distribution among HGGs. (B) Patient overall survival among HGGs. (C) Expression of five signature genes among HGGs.
          
          
        
        We then determined the dependence of the signature of clinicopathological and molecular parameters in HGG patients from GSE16011 dataset by univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. All the parameters (Table 2) were selected based on our clinical experience that were related to prognosis. We found that the signature (risk score), age, preoperative KPS score, IDH1 status, and histology were statistically associated with OS (p < 0.01) (Table 3). Multivariate Cox analysis indicated that the signature was an independent prognostic factor (p = 0.018) after adjusted for age, preoperative KPS score, and histology (Table 3).
        
          Table 2
          
            Clinicopathological and molecular parameters of HGG patients in GSE16011 dataset (n = 210)
          
          
            
              
                Variable
                
                Total
                Low risk score (n = 105)
                High risk score (n = 105)
                p value
              
            
            
              
                Age at diagnosis
                < 45
                74
                50
                24
                < 0.05
              
              
                
                ≥ 45
                136
                55
                81
                
              
              
                Gender
                Male
                139
                64
                75
                > 0.05
              
              
                
                Female
                71
                41
                30
                
              
              
                Preoperative KPS score
                < 80
                57
                28
                29
                > 0.05
              
              
                
                > 80
                144
                72
                72
                
              
              
                
                NA
                9
                5
                4
                
              
              
                Histology
                AA
                13
                11
                2
                < 0.05
              
              
                
                AO
                42
                33
                9
                
              
              
                
                AOA
                23
                20
                3
                
              
              
                
                GBM
                132
                41
                91
                
              
              
                IDH1 mutation
                Mut
                59
                42
                17
                < 0.05
              
              
                
                WT
                108
                45
                63
                
              
              
                
                NA
                43
                23
                21
                
              
              
                Extent of surgery
                Total
                67
                32
                35
                > 0.05
              
              
                
                Subtotal
                114
                64
                50
                
              
              
                
                NA
                29
                12
                17
                
              
              
                Radiotherapy
                Yes
                175
                86
                89
                Not available
              
              
                
                No
                0
                0
                0
                
              
              
                
                NA
                35
                19
                16
                
              
              
                Chemotherapy
                Yes
                26
                13
                13
                > 0.05
              
              
                
                No
                150
                75
                75
                
              
              
                
                NA
                34
                17
                17
                
              
            
          
        
        
          Table 3
          
            Factors associated with overall survival of HGG patients by Cox regression analysis in GSE16011 dataset
          
          
            
              
                Variable
                Univariate Cox Regression
                Multivariate Cox Regression
              
              
                HR
                95%CI
                p value
                HR
                95%CI
                p value
              
            
            
              
                
                  
                    Overall Survival
                  
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
              
              
                Gender (Male vs. Female)
                1.010
                0.752–1.356
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
              
                Age at diagnosis(< 45 vs. > 45)
                2.661
                1.945–3.639
                < 0.001
                2.417
                1.666–3.507
                < 0.001
              
              
                Preoperative KPS score(> 80 vs.< 80)
                0.577
                0.419–0.792
                < 0.01
                0.532
                0.456–1.044
                < 0.01
              
              
                Risk score (Low vs. High)
                2.749
                2.038–3.708
                < 0.001
                1.603
                1.082–2.372
                0.018
              
              
                IDH1 status (Mut vs. WT)
                0.449
                0.319–0.633
                < 0.001
                0.672
                0.451–1.002
                0.051
              
              
                Histology*
                1.622
                0.916–1.146
                < 0.001
                1.435
                1.217–1.693
                < 0.01
              
              
                Chemotherapy (Yes vs.No)
                0.640
                0.408–1.005
                0.052
                
                
                
              
              
                Extent of surgery(Total vs. Subtotal)
                0.905
                0.662–1.239
                > 0.05
                
                
                
              
            
          
          
            
              *
              Histology was defined as 1, AO, 2, AOA, 3, AA; 4.GBM.
            
          
        
        Currently, there are few reports related to the five genes in the field of Neuro-oncology. BACE2, a member of beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme family of genes, encodes an integral membrane glycoprotein that functions as an aspartic protease related to Alzheimer's disease [18]. FCGR2B (CD32B)-encoded protein is a member of Fc receptor common γ chain (FcRγ) family containing an immune tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM), which is a low affinity receptor for the Fc region of IgGs and down-regulates the antibody production by B cells. It is a promising therapeutic target for malignancies [19, 20]. ISG20 encodes an exoribonuclease that acts on a single-stranded RNA, exhibits an antiviral activity against RNA viruses in an exonuclease-dependent manner, and probably plays accessory roles in the maturation of snRNAs and rRNAs [21]. SWAP70-encoded protein specifically binds to phosphatidylinositol-3, 4, 5-triphosphate, transduces signals from tyrosine kinase receptors to RAC-protein kinase B (RAC/PKB), and regulates signaling of membrane ruffling. Studies have shown that SWAP70 is involved in signaling B cell activation and may have a potential oncogenic function in cancer [22–24]. QRSL1-encoded protein allows the formation of correctly charged Glu-tRNA through the transamidation of misacylated Glu-tRNA (Gln) in the mitochondria in the presence of glutamine and ATP through an activated gamma-phosphor-Glu-tRNA [25].
      
      
        Validation of the B cell-associated gene prognostic signature in two independent HGG platforms
        To validate the prognostic power of the signature, we used two independent glioma mRNA expression profiling datasets from Rembrandt and TCGA RNAseq databases. In 242 HGGs of 311 glioma cases from REMBRANDT and 330 HGGs of 502 glioma cases from TCGA, we applied the same risk score formula developed in the training set to calculate the risk score for each patient and accordingly divided the patients into the low and high risk groups in line with the risk score using the same cutoff. Similarly as in the training set, the patients were successfully stratified into the high and low risk groups with the high risk patients having a shorter OS (p < 0.001) (Figure 1D–1I, Supplementary Figure S1B and S1C, Figure 2A and 2B) and expressing the high levels of the risky genes and the low level of the protective gene (Figure 2C) (p < 0.001).
      
      
        The B cell-associated gene signature assisted predicting the efficacy of radiotherapy and chemoradiotherapy for low and high risk HGG patients
        To determine whether the signature assists predicting the efficacy of the postoperative RT and CT in HGG patients, we extracted the therapeutic information available for 175 HGG patients in GSE16011 dataset. According to their risk scores calculated using the signature, 89 patients (76 patients underwent RT and 13 patients underwent CRT) were stratified to the high risk group and the other 86 patients (75 patients underwent RT and 11 patients underwent CRT) to the low risk group. We then compared the survival advantage between RT and CRT by Kaplan-Meier plotting in each group. We found that OS did not differ significantly between RT and CRT in the low risk group (p > 0.05), that is, the addition of CT to RT did not improve OS of HGG patients with the low risk scores, but the benefit of CRT was observed in the high risk group with significantly improved OS (p < 0.05) (Figure 3A–3C).
        
          Figure 3
          
            The signature assisted predicting the efficacy of radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy in HGG patients
            (A, D) HGG patients in GSE 16011 and GBM patients in TCGA treated with CRT showed a better prognosis than those with RT alone. (B, E) Benefit of CT was observed in the high risk group with significantly improved OS (p < 0.05). (C, F) The addition of CT to RT did not improve OS of patients in the low risk group (p > 0.05). R, radiotherapy; R + C, radiotherapy + chemotherapy; LR, low risk group; HR, high risk group.
          
          
        
        We then used 360 GBM patients treated with standard RT with or without temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy in TCGA dataset to confirm the therapeutic predictive value of the signature. Similarly, CRT was only beneficial for the high risk GBM patients (p < 0.001) (33 RT/148 CRT) but not for the low risk GBM patients (p > 0.05) (28 RT/151 CRT) (Figure 3D–3F). The findings suggest that the low risk patients should avoid unnecessary chemotherapy.
      
      
        The signature-stratified low and high risk HGGs exhibited distinct molecular features
        Considering the potential of the signature in predicting clinical therapies, we next assessed the association of the low and high risk groups with some known molecular features of gliomas and related clinical characteristics. We found that tumors with high risk scores included almost all TCGA Mesenchymal subtype tumors and wild-type IDH1, whereas tumors with low risk scores contained most of TCGA Proneural subtype tumors and IDH1 mutation consistently in the three datasets of GSE16011, TCGA, and REMBRANDT (P < 0.001) (Figure 4A, Figure 5A–5H). However, the signature stratified TCGA Classical and Neural subtype tumors, as well as grade III and IV tumors described earlier (Figure 1), into the low and high risk groups (Figure 4A), patients of which showed differential survival advantages (Supplementary Figure S3) in TCGA dataset.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Distribution of molecular and clinicopathological features for HGGs and their patients aligned with the risk score in the three datasets
            (A) Tumors with high risk scores contained almost all TCGA Mesenchymal subtype and wild-type IDH1, and tumors with low risk scores included most of TCGA Proneural subtype and mutated IDH1. Grade III and IV tumors were distributed in both the low and high risk groups. (B) The differentially expressed genes were shown from the low to high risk score tumors. Pink represents the high expression of genes in the high risk group; blue represents the low expression of the genes in the high risk group.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 5
          
            The low and high risk score HGGs exhibited distinct TCGA molecular subtypes and IDH1 mutation status
            (A–C) The Proneural subtype was preferentially stratified into the low risk group. (D–F) The Mesenchymal subtype was mainly stratified to the high risk group. (G, H) The IDH1 mutation was dominant in the low risk group while the wild-type IDH1 preferentially present in the high risk group. Each spot represents the risk score of the individual HGG. Line in the middle was the mean value of the risk score.
          
          
        
      
      
        The high risk HGGs exhibited enhanced expression of immunosuppressive factors and regulatory immune cells
        The notable differences in the two risk groups of HGGs led us to further conduct a whole-genome gene expression analysis by SAM method using the same three datasets to obtain a broader biological insight between the two groups. After 1000 times of permutation test, those genes with FDR < 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed between the two groups, which exhibited a good separation from the low to high risk score shown by one-dimensional hierarchical clustering analysis (Figure 4B). By screening top 1000 increased expression genes and 1000 decreased expression genes in the three datasets, the overlapped genes (416 genes with increased expression and 368 genes with decreased expression) in the high risk group (Supplementary Table S1B and S1C) were chosen for further analysis. The positively correlated genes (pink marked genes in Figure 4B) were used for GO analysis. The top 15 GO terms indicated that these genes were mainly related to immune response such as defense response, inflammatory response, positive regulation of I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade, leukocyte-mediated immunity, and response to hypoxia and oxygen levels (Figure 6A).
        
          Figure 6
          
            Functional annotation of the high risk versus the low risk group
            (A) GO analysis revealed that 416 genes with increased expression in the high risk group were mainly related to immune response. Red column height: gene counts; blue column height: enrichment p value. BP, biological process. (B) Genes encoding immunosuppressive factors TGF-β, IL10, CD274 (protein name PDL1), and FASLG (FASL) were highly expressed in the high risk group. (C, D) MDSC marker genes (ITGAM (CD11b), CD14, FUT4 (CD15), and CD33) and M2 microglia/macrophage marker genes (CD68, CD163, MSR1 (CD204), and MRC1 (CD206)) were significantly up-regulated in the high risk group. (E) Tregs marker genes (CD4, IL2RA(CD25), ICOS, IDO1, and FoxP3) showed increased expression in the high risk group. (F–H) The enrichment plots of the gene expression related to inhibiting activation and differentiation of CD8+ T cells to cytotoxic CD8+ T cells were separated between the low and high risk score groups. Class A, the high risk group; Class B, the low risk group; NES, Normalized Enrichment Score; FDR, False Discovery Rate.*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
          
          
        
        HGG patients generally have poor immune response. To further decipher the association of the immunological state with HGGs, we specifically analyzed immunosuppressive gene expression between the low and high risk groups in TCGA dataset. Immunosuppressive factor genes (IL10, TGFβ1, CD274 (protein name PDL1) and FASLG (FASL)) were significantly increased in the high risk group compared with the low risk group (Figure 6B). Marker genes of immunosuppressive cells such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) (ITGAM (CD11b), CD14, FUT4 (CD15), CD33) [26] and M2 microglia/macrophages (CD68, CD163, MSR1 (CD204) and MRC1 (CD206)) [27, 28] were significantly up-regulated in the high risk group compared with the low risk group (Figure 6C and 6D). Similarly, the expressions of Treg marker genes (CD4, ICOS, IDO1, FoxP3, IL2RA (CD25)) [29] were elevated in the high risk group (Figure 6E). In addition, we also observed the similar expression patterns of the immunosuppressive factors and cell markers in the other two datasets of GSE16011 and Rembrandt (Supplementary Figure S4). GSEA analyses of the three datasets further indicated that the high risk group had increased expression of genes (Supplementary Table S1D) that inhibit the activation of memory CD8+ T cells and their differentiation to cytotoxic CD8+ effector T cells (Figure 6G–6I).
        Taken together, the findings demonstrated that strong immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment contributed to the worse malignancy of the tumors and eventually poorer survival of the patients stratified in the high risk group.
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      A growing body of evidences has supported the interaction between the immune system and glioma pathogenesis [30, 31]. A few prognostic immune signatures related to T cell, NK cell, and microglia/macrophage have been reported for gliomas [32, 33], but no B cell-associated signature was studied in the disease. Here, by using a risk score method we identified and validated a signature composed of five B cell associated genes based on the three independent genome-wide gene expression datasets. The signature successfully divides glioma patients especially high grade glioma patients into the low risk group with favorable OS and the high risk group with poor survival, consistently the latter exhibiting significantly strong immunosuppressive microenvironment in their tumors. The signature also shows that the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy improves OS of the high risk patients, but not that of the low risk ones after surgery. These findings aid in better understanding of the interplay between immune response and glioma progression.
      The immune responsive microenvironment of tumors contributes to an antitumor activity while the immune suppressive state promotes tumor development [34]. In our study, we have found that the major differences of the low and high risk groups of the HGG patients are related to immune response such as inflammatory response and leukocyte-mediated immunity. Because the microenvironment of GBM is highly immunosuppressive [35], we have then analyzed the gene expression patterns of the two risk groups and found that the high risk group exhibits significantly increased expression of classical immunosuppressive factors such as IL10, TGF-β, PDL1, and FASL and many immunosuppressive cell markers related to immunosuppressive cells such as tumor-associated macrophage M2, Tregs, and MDSC. The presence of immunosuppressive factors such as IL-10 and TGF-β and inhibitory molecules on the GBM cell surface were reported to inhibit the antitumor activities of T cells, B cells, NK cells, and monocytes [35]. FASL was expressed in human malignant glioma cells and induced apoptosis of T lymphocytes [36]. Astrocytoma cell lines expressed PDL1, which inhibited T cell functions such as proliferation and cytotoxicity and promoted apoptosis [37]. In addition, the presence of immunosuppressive infiltrates such as FoxP3+ Treg cells, M2 macrophages, and MDSC were documented in gliomas and associated with poor survival in gliomas [38, 39]. These studies support our findings that tumors of the five B cell-associated gene signature-stratified high risk group are more immune suppressive compared with those of the low risk group, thus creating a more favorable microenvironment for glioma progression.
      Accurate classification of tumors is important for appropriate treatment selection. Nevertheless, no single genetic alteration could elucidate the complicated pathogenesis of HGGs, leading to the difficulty in choosing appropriate therapeutic strategies for HGG patients. In the study, we found that the addition of CT to RT did not improve OS of patients in the low risk group compared to the benefit of CRT in the high risk group with significantly improved OS. Accumulated evidence indicates that RT and CT potentiate an antitumor activity in esophageal and rectal cancer via activating immune response through increased tumor antigen exposure by CT-induced immunogenic tumor cell death and released proinflammatory cytokines to activate T effector cell response [40, 41]. In addition, preclinical studies have demonstrated that the density of CD4+ and CD8+TILs is positively associated with good response after RT, CT and CRT [42]. Furthermore, basic studies of breast and prostate cancer suggest that RT or CT may be more sufficient in immunocompetent mice than immunosuppressive ones [43, 44]. We have found that the addition of CT to RT can not significantly improve OS in the low risk group. This is probably because of good immune responsive state of those patients and thus having good response to RT, in other words, RT only is sufficient to generate the same therapeutic effect as CRT, meanwhile avoiding the toxicity of adjuvant CT. However, we have found that the addition of CT generates the better outcomes for the high risk patients with strong immunosuppression. This is most likely because CT-induced myelosuppression and lymphopenia effectively deplete immunosuppressive cells such as Treg cells and thus eliminate the immune tolerance to autologous tumor antigens [45–47] in the group of patients. Such lymphodepletion induces reactive homeostatic proliferation and generates more active immune response to tumor antigens from CRT-caused tumor cell death [48, 49], leading to significantly improved OS of this group of patients. Therefore, the signature can identify glioma patients with a poor survival who may take advantage of adjuvant CT and patients with a favorable survival who should avoid the CT treatment.
      More than 70% of gliomas carry the mutation of IDH1 (R132H), which occurs in the critical arginine residue (Arg, R) in the catalytic pocket to histidine (His, H) [50]. Recent studies have shown that IDH1 (R132H) represents an immunogenic tumor antigen recognized by CD4+IFN-γ-producing T cells in patients [51]. In our study, the IDH1 (R132H) mutation was preferentially found in the low risk group with the more immune responsive state. Basic studies showed that an IDH1 (R132H) vaccine induced a specific antitumor immune response against IDH1 (R132H)-mutated tumors and the antitumor effect was associated with CD19+B cells through their antigen presentation capacity in an MHC-humanized mice model [52]. Coincidently, we have found that the high expression of FCRG2B (CD32B), the inhibitor of antigen presentation and antibody production by B cells, occurs in the high risk group, which was opposite with the preferential occurrence of IDH1 mutation in the low risk group. Our previous study showed that the plasma of patients of low grade tumors contained a higher level of IgG autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigen IGFBP2 than that of high grade tumor patients [53].
      The molecular heterogeneity of gliomas especially GBM has been widely recognized. Four molecular subtypes (Proneural, Neural, Classical, and Mesenchymal) were identified and adopted by TCGA [54]. The correlation between these subtypes with the immune system has attracted increased attention because of increasingly recognized roles of the immune system in etiology and developing new immunotherapy in gliomas. Previous studies showed the existence of different immunological states between Proneural and Mesenchymal subtypes [55], and an immune prognostic signature was reported for GBM patients especially for ones with the Proneural subtype [56]. We have found that the patients with the lower risk score are preferentially associated with the Proneural subtype and exhibit a significantly better prognosis, and the patients with the higher risk score show the Mesenchymal preference and poor survival, which are consistent with the previous report showing that Mesenchymal gliomas with immune suppressive nature were more aggressive and led to poor patient survival [57].
      The role of tumor-infiltrating B cells (TIL-Bs) in gliomas remains poorly understood. Some studies reported B cell infiltration in gliomas [58, 59]. Engler et al. found that microglia/macrophage-related genes were significantly enriched in the Mesenchymal subtype compared to the non-Mesenchymal ones, but the B cell gene signature was not enriched to the significance between the two groups [59], which is likely due to impaired normalized enrichment score of the B cell gene set signature when the whole B cell-specific gene set including ones not directly associated with the disease is incorporated in the enrichment analysis. In other cancer types such as breast cancer and NSCLC, TIL-Bs can act as antigen presenting cells (APCs) for a variety of tumor antigens and interplay with CD4+ and CD8+ T cells for increased survival [60, 61]. In a GBM mouse model, B cells act as APCs for T cell-mediated antitumor immunity and tumor regression [62]. However, the role of B cells in tumor immunity has remained controversial. Other reports demonstrated that TIL-Bs suppressed immune response in some tumor types such as lymphoma, colon cancer, melanoma, and skin carcinoma [63, 64]. In the study, we have found that the risky gene FCGR2B is highly expressed in tumors of the high risk group, which was reported to play the immunosuppressive role, although the functions of other four signature genes in the immune system remain to be explored. Therefore, based on our findings, FCGR2B could be a target for immune checkpoint inhibition to improve antitumor response of immunotherapy for glioma patients.
      In summary, our study has provided a clear view that the immune system such as the B lymphocyte interplays with gliomas and thus influences the prognosis of HGG patients. To our knowledge, this is the first report to identify a signature composed of the B cell-associated genes, which reveals different immunological states of glioma tumors of the low and high risk patients. The signature can help stratify HGG patients for optimal treatment strategies.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Databases and B cell lineage-specific genes used in the study
        Whole-genome mRNA expression microarray data and clinical information (including age at diagnosis, gender, preoperative Karnofsky Performance score (KPS), histology, postoperative radiotherapy with or without adjuvant CT, and isocitrate dehydrogenase type 1 (IDH1) gene mutation status) were obtained from GSE16011 database as a training set (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE16011), and the validation datasets include The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database (mRNA and RNAseq data) (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) and Repository for Molecular Brain Neoplasis Data (REMBRANDT) (http://caintegrator.nci.nih.gov/rembrandt). The RNAseq data were log2 transformed before analysis. A set of 78 B cell lineage-specific genes (Supplementary Table S1A) was adopted from a previous study [30].
      
      
        Statistical analysis and signature identification and validation
        Patients alive for more than 90 days were eligible for the study because too short survival was more likely resulted from severe complication rather than glioma occurrence. In 232 glioma samples from GSE16011 dataset, there were 22 grade II tumors, 78 grade III tumors (including AA, AO, and AOA), and 132 GBMs. OS was calculated as the interval from the day of first surgery to death or the end of follow-up. Firstly, an unpaired two-tailed Student's t test was used to discriminate the expression level of each gene in the B cell lineage-specific gene set between each two of II-IV grade tumors. Secondly, the prognostic value of the differentially expressed gene (higher or lower than the median expression level) was calculated by the univariate Cox regression analysis with log-rank test by packages (survival) of R to get the corresponding Hazard Ratio (HR) and p value in four groups (grade II, III, IV, and HGG). Then the differentially expressed genes with significant prognostic value (p < 0.05) were selected after screened by the two steps. As a result, we identified five B cell-associated genes, which were then used to form a signature for prediction assessment and further validation in other two datasets (TCGA and REMBRANDT).
        To test the power of the five gene signature for predicting clinical outcomes, a risk score formula for survival prediction was constructed according to a linear combination of the mRNA expression level of the five genes and weighted by the regression coefficient from the univariate Cox regression analyses (β) [65]. Based on the five gene signature, the risk score for each patient was calculated as follows:
        Risk score = expr gene1 × βgene1 +expr gene2 × βgene2+… + expr gene5 × βgene5
        According to this model, patients having high risk scores were expected to have poor OS. Patients of each grade in the training set were stratified into a high or low risk group by using the 50th percentile risk score as the cut off. Considering genes with multiple probes in the microarray settings, we chose the probe having a larger standard deviation (SD) and smaller β value, which is more likely to have a prognostic value with less likely to have a bias. This is a widely accepted method to filter genes with multiple probes by applying SD or median absolute deviation (MAD) [54]. We used the same β in the validation sets. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to discriminate overall survival by using the Mantel log-rank to assess the statistical significance between different groups with GraphPad Prism 6.0 statistical software.
        To further annotate the biological insight of the high and low risk groups stratified by the signature, the differently expressed genes of HGGs were identified by significance analysis of microarray (SAM). Those genes with increased expression in tumors of high risk patients were used for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis in DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was downloaded from the Broad Institute (www.broadinstitute.org/gsea) for functional annotation. Heat maps of different grades of gliomas were constructed by Gene Cluster 3.0 and Gene Tree View software. The χ2 test was applied for statistical analysis of the correlation for two independent variables. Univariate and multivariate Cox analyses were performed using the Cox proportional hazard method; all the variables chosen were based on our clinical experience, which are related to prognosis. A two-sided p value of < 0.05 was regarded as significant.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS FIGURES AND TABLE
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        The detailed molecular mechanisms and safety issues of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) usage in bone graft substitution remain poorly understood. To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the function of rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells, we used microarrays to determine the gene expression patterns related to the effects of rhBMP-2. Based on a gene ontology analysis, several genes were upregulated during the regulation of the cell cycle and BMP signaling pathway. MYC was found to be significantly decreased along with its downstream target genes, the aurora kinases (AURKs), by rhBMP-2 in the network analysis. We further confirmed this finding with western blot data that rhBMP-2 inhibited c-Myc, AURKs, and β-catenin in SNU484 and SNU638 cells. An AURK inhibitor significantly decreased c-Myc expression in gastric cancer cells. Combination treatment with rhBMP-2 and AURK inhibitor resulted in significantly decreased c-Myc expression compared with gastric cancer cells treated with an rhBMP-2 or AURK inhibitor, respectively. Similar effects for decreased c-Myc expression were observed when we silenced β-catenin in gastric cancer cells. These results indicate that rhBMP-2 attenuated the growth of gastric cancer cells via the inactivation of β-catenin via c-Myc and AURKs. Therefore, our findings suggest that rhBMP-2 could be safely used with patients who undergo gastric or gastroesophageal cancer surgery.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Gastric cancer is the fourth most common type of cancer worldwide and ranks second in cancer mortality [1]. Growing evidence shows that the incidence of gastric cancer has decreased, but the mortality rate has steadily increased over the past decades because it often presents at an advanced stage with an overall survival of about 10 months [2–5]. The most effective curative treatment for gastric cancer is surgery, with chemotherapy and radiation therapy most commonly recommended after surgery [5–7]. However, long-term survival after current chemotherapy-based treatments for advanced gastric cancer is disappointing [7–9]. Therefore, innovative therapeutic approaches must be explored to improve clinical outcomes for gastric cancer patients.
      Current approaches for reconstructive techniques include tissue engineering [10]. Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein (rhBMP)-2 is commonly used in bone graft substitutions, including for bone fracture and spinal surgery [11]. Moreover, rhBMP-2 enhances osteoinductive factors and improves bone therapy [11–13]. However, the use of rhBMP-2 in the area of a resected tumor or in patients undergoing treatment for malignancy is limited due to the unknown effects of BMP-2 on malignancies and other contraindications [14–16]. Moreover, the function of BMP-2 raises the possibility of cancer promotion since BMP-2 and its receptors are highly expressed in many human cancers [17]. For instance, Kokorina et al. reported that rhBMP-2 treatment induces cancer cell growth and tumor cell invasion [10, 14, 18]. In addition, a study that evaluated the association between rhBMP-2 and malignancy by reviewing 515 articles [19] found that 43 studies indicated that BMP-2 enhances cancer growth. However, 18 studies found that BMP-2 suppresses cancer proliferation [19]. Our recent publications have found evidence of an antitumor effect of BMP-2 in esophageal cancer cells through the activation of the hippo signaling pathway [20] and that rhBMP-2 has an anticancer effect in vitro and in vivo in breast cancer cell lines [21]. Thus, the use of rhBMP-2 raises safety issues regarding cancer risk, but data on the effect of exogenous BMP-2 on cancer are conflicting. Further studies on BMP-2 and cancer are required.
      There have been no reports of a correlation between rhBMP-2 effects and human gastric cancer cells or the use of rhBMP-2 for reconstructive surgery on bone defects by cancer of the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate gene expression related to the mechanisms of rhBMP-2 in human gastric cancer cells. We demonstrated that rhBMP-2 significantly inhibited gastric cell viability, and the effects were mediated by suppressing the expression of β-catenin, c-Myc, and AURKs. These results indicated that rhBMP-2 suppresses activation of the Wnt signaling pathway via c-Myc and AURKs, which may, in part, induce cell death of the gastric cancer cells.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Effects of rhBMP-2 on the proliferation of gastric cancer cells
        To investigate the effects of rhBMP-2 on gastric cancer cell proliferation, MTT assays were performed on SNU484 and SNU638 cells. The viability of the SNU484 and SNU638 cells was significantly inhibited following rhBMP-2 treatment in a dose-dependent manner compared with the non-treatment group (Figure 1A). In the SNU484 cell line, inhibition of cell viability with treatment compared to the control group was 81.21% ± 8.50% (P = 0.058) with 10 nM, 62.72% ± 5.31% (P = 0.002) with 250 nM, 45.15% ± 4.91% (P = 0.000) with 500 nM, and 36.95% ± 0.24% (P = 0.000) with 1000 nM BMP-2. In the SNU638 cell line, treatment with same doses of rhBMP-2 resulted in 87.13% ± 4.36% (P = 0.100), 69.01% ± 5.86% (P = 0.029), 49.71% ± 4.15% (P = 0.009), and 34.00 ± 2.97% (P = 0.004), respectively for the inhibition of cell viability compared to the controls. These results demonstrated that rhBMP-2 exhibited significant cytotoxicity on the gastric cancer cells.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Effects of rhBMP-2 on SNU484 and SNU638 cell proliferation and colony formation
            A. RhBMP-2 inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. B. Consistent with MTT assays, significantly fewer colonies were formed compared with the control cancer cells in the presence of 1 μM rhBMP-2 after 30 days. Values represent the mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments with triplicate plates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 vs. untreated cells.
          
          
        
      
      
        Effects of rhBMP-2 on SNU484 and SNU638 colony formation
        Colony formation assays analyzed with the anchorage-independent growth of SNU484 and SNU638 cells in semisolid medium. A significant decrease was observed for the number of colonies of SNU484 and SNU638 cells compared with the control cancer cells after four weeks in the presence of 1 μM rhBMP-2 (Figure 1B). Therefore, RhBMP-2 effectively inhibited the colony formation of gastric cancer cells. These findings confirmed that BMP-2 significantly inhibited gastric cancer cell proliferation by soft agar colony formation assays.
      
      
        Effects of BMP-2 on p-Smad1/5/8 expression
        We next investigated whether rhBMP-2 increased bone morphogenetic protein receptor (BMPR) I, BMPRII, and p-Smad1/5/8 proteins. Expression of rhBMP-2 protein significantly increased following treatment with rhBMP-2 (Figure 2A). To address whether the treatment with rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells could increase the level of endogenous BMP-2 expression, we performed real-time RT-PCR to measure the endogenous BMP-2 expression following treatment with rhBMP-2 in SNU484 and SNU638 cells. We found that rhBMP-2 significantly increased BMP-2 mRNA levels in SNU484 and SNU638 cells (Figure 2B). RhBMP-2 increased both the mRNA and protein levels of BMP-2 in gastric cancer cells, which is in line with the microarray analysis of the activation of the BMP-2 signaling pathway. We measured ERK1/2 and p-ERK1/2 expression following treatment of rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells. RhBMP-2 suppressed p-ERK1/2 expression in SNU484 and SNU638 cells at 48 h following treatment of rhBMP-2, while ERK1/2 expression remained unchanged (Supplementary Figure S1). The BMPRII protein levels increased and p-Smad1/5/8 protein expression was significantly increased following rhBMP-2 treatment of SNU484 and SNU638 cells. Therefore, rhBMP-2 appeared to stimulate the activation of BMPRII, which stimulated the expression of p-Smad1/5/8 proteins in gastric cancer cells. Furthermore, Smad signaling was induced by the rhBMP-2 treatment.
        
          Figure 2
          
            Western blots showing the effect of BMP-2 on Smad signaling pathway-related proteins in SNU484 and SNU638 cells
            A. BMPRI, BMPRII, and p-Smad1/5/8 were measured by western blots of SNU484 and SNU638 cells after treatment with rhBMP-2 for 72 h and immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. GAPDH was used as an internal control. B. Endogenous BMP-2 mRNA determined by qRT-PCR after treatment of SNU484 and SNU638 cell lines with rhBMP-2 for 72 h. The ratios of the normalized expression of the target genes relative to the control (untreated) cells are shown. Results are the means ± SEM. β-actin was used as an internal control. **P < 0.01 vs. untreated cells.
          
          
        
      
      
        Effects of rhBMP-2 on gene expression profiling
        To test whether the regulation of gene expression mediated the BMP-induced human gastric cancer cell death, microarrays were used to identify gene expression patterns using an Illumina bead array platform. The data showed that more than 1453 genes were regulated by BMP-2 treatment. Specifically, the expression of 826 genes was significantly upregulated, and 609 genes were significantly downregulated after the treatment of SNU484 cells with rhBMP-2 (Figure 3A). Gene ontology (GO) and canonical pathway analysis to determine the biological characteristics of selected genes revealed that cell cycle regulation, the mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, G2/M damage checkpoint regulation, and the BMP signaling pathway were controlled by treatment with rhBMP-2 (Figure 3B). To evaluate the association between BMP-2 treatment and signaling pathway associations, a further gene-network analysis was performed using Ingenuity™ Pathway Analysis. We found that more than 20 networks were enriched for cell cycle, cellular growth and proliferation, cell death, and survival. Furthermore, an upstream analysis of the network revealed that the BMP2 signaling pathway was highly activated as shown by BMP-2 downstream target genes BMPRA, BMPR2, CTSK, ID1, ID2, ID3, ID4, HES5, HEY1, SMAD6, SMAD7, and SMAD9 (Figure 3C and 3D). MYC signaling was significantly downregulated after treatment with rhBMP-2 as shown by the downstream target genes AURKB, CCNA2, CCNB2, CDC20, CDC25B, CDK1, CDK2, EZH2, and FOXM1 (Figure 3C and 3D). Therefore, MYC may be the core gene responsible for regulating many downstream genes following rhBMP-2 treatment.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Gene expression profile regarding the effect of rhBMP-2 in SNU484 gastric cancer cells
            A. A microarray heat map summarizing the effect of rhBMP-2 using an Illumina bead array platform. Data are presented in a matrix format. Rows represent the individual genes and the columns represent samples. Red, up-regulation; green, down-regulation. B. Top canonical pathway analysis for different functional categories. C. Microarray heat map summarizing BMP signaling-related genes by rhBMP-2 treatment (top) and cell cycle regulation signaling-related genes by rhBMP-2 treatment (down). Potential targets of BMP-2 and c-Myc. D. Gene networks of BMP-2 and c-Myc from an Ingenuity TM pathway analysis. Red, up-regulation; green, down-regulation; blue, predicted inhibition; orange, predicted activation. Orange dash line, leads to activation; blue line, leads to inhibition.
          
          
        
      
      
        Effect of rhBMP-2 on Myc signaling on gastric cancer cells
        To determine whether BMP-2 expression was inversely correlated with MYC expression, we further investigated c-Myc expression that was decreased by rhBMP treatment in the microarrays using RT-PCR and western blot. RT-PCR revealed that 1 μM rhBMP-2 treatment significantly decreased c-Myc mRNA levels (Figure 4A). Additionally, treatment with rhBMP-2 significantly attenuated c-Myc protein expression (Figure 4B). These data suggest that rhBMP-2 inhibits c-Myc expression in gastric cancer cells. These observations are in agreement with the microarray data, suggesting that rhBMP-2 may suppress the expression of c-Myc in gastric cancer cells.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Validation of c-Myc expression following the treatment of gastric cancer cells with rhBMP-2
            A. c-Myc mRNA by qRT-PCR and B. western blots after treatment of SNU484 and SNU638 cell lines with rhBMP-2 for 72 h. Expression of the target genes monitored and normalized by GAPDH expression. The ratios of normalized expression of target genes relative to control (untreated) cells are shown. Results are presented as the means ± SEM.
          
          
        
      
      
        Cell cycle regulatory protein expression by rhBMP-2
        The microarray data revealed that the regulation of the cell cycle was induced by rhBMP-2 treatment. To determine the involvement of rhBMP-2 in cell cycle regulation, we determined the cell cycle distribution using a fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis. Cell cycle fractions were measured at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 h after treatment of the SNU484 cells with rhBMP-2. The population in the G1 phase of the cell cycle significantly and time-dependently increased (Figure 5A). Since BMP-2 induced G1 cell cycle arrest in gastric cancer cells, we tested the cells for alterations in cell cycle regulatory proteins (e.g., p21 and p53) after treatment with rhBMP-2. We found that p53 protein levels increased at 12 h and continued increasing until 72 h. Protein levels of p21 we also increased at 24 h after rhBMP-2 treatment and gradually increased until 72 h. These results suggest that rhBMP-2 induced cell cycle arrest and thus, inhibited gastric cell proliferation.
        
          Figure 5
          
            Cell cycle distribution of gastric cancer cells by rhBMP-2
            A. Cells were incubated with 1 μM rhBMP-2 for 0, 12, 24, 48, or 72 h. Cell cycle distribution was evaluated as a percentage of cells in the G1, S, and G2/M phase. B. Protein measurements for p53 and p21 following treatment of rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells for 0, 12, 24, 48, or 72 h. Target gene expression was monitored and normalized to GAPDH expression.
          
          
        
      
      
        Effect of rhBMP-2 on AURKA and AURKB signaling in gastric cancer cells
        We next determined the expression of aurora kinase A (AURKA) and aurora kinase B (AURKB), which are downstream target genes of Myc. We found that both target genes were decreased by rhBMP treatment in the microarray experiments. Treatment with rhBMP-2 significantly decreased the mRNA levels of AURKA and AURKB in SNU 484 cells (Figure 6A). RhBMP-2 significantly decreased AURKA mRNA but no significant difference was observed for AURKB after rhBMP-2 treatment of SNU638 cells. In western blots, similar observations were found for both types of gastric cancer cells. Moreover, rhBMP-2 suppressed AURKA and AURKB protein levels in the SNU484 and SNU638 cells (Figure 6B). To further investigate whether rhBMP-2 regulates c-Myc expression mediated through AURK in gastric cancer cells, we used an AURK inhibitor (500 nM) in combination with rhBMP-2 in SNU484 and SNU638 cells. As shown in Figure 6C. AURKA and AURKB were suppressed following treatment with the AURK inhibitor. Moreover, the AURK inhibitor suppressed c-Myc protein expression in the SNU484 and SNU638 cells. In addition, the AURK inhibitor combined with the rhBMP-2 treatment significantly decreased the expression of c-Myc expression levels compared to rhBMP-2 or AURK inhibitor treatment alone in SNU484 and SNU638 cells. These results indicate that the rhBMP-2-induced decrease in c-Myc expression was mediated by AURK in gastric cancer cells.
        
          Figure 6
          
            Validation of AURKA and AURKB expression after gastric cancer cell treatment with rhBMP-2
            AURKA and AURKB mRNA determined by A. qRT-PCR and B. western blots after treatment of SNU484 and SNU638 cell lines with rhBMP-2 for 72 h. The expression of target genes was monitored and normalized to GAPDH expression. The ratios of the normalized expression of target genes relative to the control (untreated) cells are shown. Results are expressed as the means ± SEM. C. Western blotting assays for the expression of c-Myc, AURKA, and AURKB proteins in aurora kinase A and B inhibitor pretreated cells treated with or without 1 μM rhBMP-2 for 48 h in SNU484 and SNU638 cell lines. GAPDH was used as an internal control.
          
          
        
      
      
        Effect of rhBMP-2 on β-catenin signaling in SNU484 and SNU638 cells
        The β-catenin signaling pathway is important for cancer progression, and the overexpression of β-catenin has been reported for various cancer types, including gastric cancer [22]. To further investigate the interaction between rhBMP-2 and the β-catenin signaling pathway, we measured the β-catenin protein levels after rhBMP-2 treatment using western blot. The level of phosphorylated β-catenin protein was increased in both cell lines (Figure 7A). However, no change was observed in the level of β-catenin protein with rhBMP-2 treatment (Figure 7A). These data suggest that the β-catenin oncogene was significantly downregulated by the rhBMP-2 treatment of gastric cancer cells. To further investigate whether rhBMP-2 regulates c-Myc expression mediated through β-catenin in gastric cancer cells, we performed a β-catenin siRNA experiment with rhBMP-2 treatment. The silencing of β-catenin inhibited c-Myc protein expression in the SNU484 and SNU638 cells (Figure 7B). Furthermore, combination treatment of rhBMP-2 with the silencing of β-catenin significantly decreased the expression of c-Myc compared to rhBMP-2 treatment or silencing of β-catenin alone in SNU484 and SNU638 cells. These results suggest that the rhBMP-2-induced decrease in c-Myc expression was mediated through β-catenin in gastric cancer cells.
        
          Figure 7
          
            Validation of β-catenin expression after treatment of gastric cancer cells with rhBMP-2
            A. β-catenin protein expression by western blot after treatment of SNU484 and SNU638 cells with rhBMP-2 for 72 h. B. Western blotting assays for the expression of c-Myc, p-β-catenin, and β-catenin proteins in β-catenin siRNA transfected cells treated with or without 1 μM rhBMP-2 for 48 h in SNU484 and SNU638 cell lines. GAPDH was used as an internal control.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      The aim of this study was to investigate the biological function of rhBMP-2 on the gene expression profile in human gastric cancer cells. RhBMP-2 significantly suppressed the proliferation of gastric cancer cells by changing the expression of genes involved in the progression and regulation of the cell cycle. We found that rhBMP-2 significantly downregulated c-Myc transcription activity in gastric cancer cells.
      Gene expression profiling has been used to identify biomarkers for the purpose of clarifying biological mechanisms [5, 23], categorizing cancer subtypes [5, 24], predicting cancer prognosis [5, 25], and elucidating gene expression in response to drugs [5, 26]. Since the safety issues concerning rhBMP-2 treatment have been debated since the beginning of its application, the effects of exogenous BMP-2 have been explored in many studies. In particular, gene expression profiling has been used to identify alterations in various signaling pathways by rhBMP-2 both in vitro and in vivo [27–30]. For example, Liu et al. reported that BMP-2 promotes the differentiation of osteoblasts and chondroblasts in RUXN2-deficient cell lines, and Zhou et al. reported that rhBMP-2 affects the gene expression of the TGF-beta/BMP pathways in human dermal fibroblasts [27, 28]. Zou et al. used a microarray analysis to demonstrate that rhBMP-2 recruits progenitor cells and promotes the proliferation and differentiation during anterior lumbar interbody fusion [31]. In addition, head and neck squamous cell carcinomas with high baseline BMP-2 protein levels are associated with higher rates of local recurrence [29]. This result supports the use of rhBMP-2 in tissue-engineering reconstructive approaches for cancer-related defects [29]. Although studies have been conducted regarding rhBMP-2 functions in the context of cancer [10, 14, 21, 29], the precise, comprehensive, and functional mechanisms through which rhBMP-2 affects gastric cancer cells remain unknown. In this study, we used gene expression profiling to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying the functions of rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells. We discovered that the expression of 1453 genes was increased or decreased at least twofold following rhBMP-2 treatment. Among these genes, 826 were increased and 609 were decreased in expression. Based on the GO analysis, many of these genes were enriched in cyclins and cell cycle regulation, mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, and G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regulation. We also found that rhBMP-2 treatment induced genes associated with the BMP-2 signaling pathway. In agreement with these microarray data, we found that rhBMP-2 stimulated the expression of BMP-2, BMPRI, and BMPRII proteins.
      Network upstream analysis revealed that rhBMP-2 significantly suppressed the expression of MYC and its downstream target genes AURKA, AURKB, CCNA2, CCNB2, CDC20, CDC25B, CDK1, CDK2, EZH2, and FOXM1. This downregulation of MYC signaling might be responsible for the inhibition of gastric cancer cell growth since we found that rhBMP-2 significantly suppressed SNU484 and SNU638 gastric cancer cell viability by MTT and soft agar colony formation assays. We validated c-Myc expression after treatment with rhBMP-2 by qPCR and western blot assay; we found that c-Myc expression was significantly suppressed by rhBMP-2 treatment in both types of gastric cancer cells. Myc is recognized as a crucial oncogene in many types of human cancers, including gastric cancer [32–34]. Therefore, the downregulation of c-Myc by rhBMP-2 might be responsible for the inhibition of gastric cancer cells.
      In addition, our data showed that rhBMP-2 stimulated a significant, time-dependent increase in the proportion of the cell population in G1 phase of the cell cycle in SNU484 cells. P53 and p21 expression were gradually increased after treatment with rhBMP-2. These results indicate that rhBMP-2 might regulate cell cycle arrest and thus, inhibit gastric cell proliferation. A study of AURKA and regulation of the cell cycle in cancer through multiple signal pathways found that AURKA diminished pRb, p53, P21waf1/cip1, and p27cip/kip but increased Plk1, CDC25, CDK1, and cyclin B1 to promote cell cycle progression [35]. Overexpression of AURKA inhibits p53 and p73 levels in cancer cells [32, 36, 37]. AURKA and AURKB are also overexpressed in a variety of human cancers, and the activation of AURKA and AURKB has oncogenic effects [38–42]. Therefore, both AURKA and AURKB appear to be associated with malignant phenotypes of cancer and function as oncogenes. We found that rhBMP-2 decreased mRNA and protein expression of AURKA and AURKB, and this may be linked to increased levels of p53 and p21 in gastric cancer cells, suggesting that rhBMP-2 arrests the cell cycle in gastric cancer cells. Furthermore, we assumed that the down-regulation of c-Myc by rhBMP-2 seemed to be correlated with AURK in gastric cancer cells. To test the hypothesis that the down-regulation of c-Myc is mediated through AURK by rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells, we measured the expression of c-Myc using an AURK inhibitor with rhBMP-2 treatment. An AURK inhibitor decreased c-Myc expression levels in gastric cancer cells. In addition, combination treatment with an rhBMP-2 and AURK inhibitor significantly decreased c-Myc expression in SNU484 and SNU638 cells compared to treatment of the rhBMP-2 or AURK inhibitor alone. Several studies have reported that Myc and AURKA directly regulate each other at the transcriptional level in various cancer cells [32, 43, 44]. For instance, AURKA stimulates telomerase activity by upregulating Myc in human ovarian and breast epithelial cells [43]. Destruction of AURKA or Myc inhibits the malignant phenotypes of hepatocellular carcinoma cells [32]. In agreement with previously published articles, our results showed that there was a direct correlation with c-Myc expression and AURK, and both were suppressed by rhBMP-2 in gastric cancer cells. Therefore, our results suggest that the down-regulation of c-Myc by rhBMP-2 may be mediated through AURK, the downstream target genes of c-Myc, and induce the inhibition of the cell cycle.
      We also presented evidence that rhBMP-2 inhibited the activation of β-catenin in the gastric cancer cells SNU484 and SNU638. We found that rhBMP-2 increased phosphorylated β-catenin in gastric cancer cells. β-catenin is regarded as a downstream target of Wnt signaling and an upstream target of c-Myc [45, 46]. β-catenin is also known as an oncogene in human gastric cancer [46]. β-catenin regulates the expression of c-Myc and the cell cycle. From our data, silencing of β-catenin was found to significantly suppress c-Myc expression in gastric cancer cells. Moreover, the combination treatment of rhBMP-2 and β-catenin silencing significantly decreased c-Myc expression in gastric cancer cells compared to the treatment of rhBMP-2 alone or silencing of β-catenin alone. These results suggest that rhBMP-2 inhibits β-catenin and c-Myc expression in gastric cancer cells. Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that rhBMP-2 suppresses the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway with their target genes and thus, causes gastric cancer cell death.
      In summary, our findings indicate that rhBNP-2 suppresses gastric cancer cell proliferation by inhibiting β-catenin and c-Myc with AURKA and AURKB expression to regulate inhibition of the cell cycle. RhBMP-2 may also be used as a therapeutic agent in gastric cancer. Further studies of rhBMP-2 in many cancers are needed because it is reported to have different effects on cell proliferation or invasion of human cancer. However, our data suggest that rhBMP-2 could be safely administered to patients who received gastric or gastroesophageal cancer surgery.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Reagents and antibodies
        Recombinant human BMP-2 was obtained from Dae Woong Pharmaceuticals (Seoul, South Korea). The BMP-2 antibody was aquired from Abcam (Cambridge, UK) and p-Smad1/5/8, β-catenin, p-β-catenin, ERK1/2, and p-ERK1/2 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Antibodies for BMPRII, c-Myc, AURKA, AURKB, and GAPDH were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). β-catenin small interfering RNA (siRNA) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, USA) and the aurora kinase A and B inhibitor (AURK inhibitor) was obtained from TOCRIS Bioscience (Bristol, UK).
      
      
        Cell cultures and viability measurements
        Human gastric cancer cell lines SNU484 and SNU638 were obtained from the Korean Cell Line Bank (Seoul National University, South Korea). SNU484 and SNU638 cells were maintained in RPMI1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 μg/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (all from Gibco-BRL, Grand Island, NY, USA) at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Cell viability was assessed by 3-4,5-dimethylthiazol-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays as described previously [7]. SNU484 and SNU638 cells were seeded at 104 cells/well in 96-well plates and allowed to adhere. After 24 h, rhBMP-2 was added to 10, 250, 500, or 1000 nM for 72 h. At the end of the culture period, 50 μL of 2 mg/mL MTT was added to the medium and incubated for 3 h at 37°C with 5% CO2. Dimethyl sulfoxide (200 μL/well) was added to dissolve the formazan crystals. The measurement was obtained at 570 nm using an Epoch Microplate Reader (Bio-Tech, Winooski, VT, USA). All results are presented as a percentage compared to the untreated cells.
      
      
        Small interfering RNA transfection and treatments
        β-catenin small interfering RNA (siRNA) or control siRNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) (100 pM) were transfected into SNU484 and SNU638 cells (2 × 105 cells/well) using Lipofectamime 2000 (Invitrogen, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. At 24 h after transfection, the cells were used for further treatment. The SNU484 and SNU638 cells were treated with an AURK inhibitor (TOCRIS Bioscience, Bristol, UK, 500 nM), and after 24 h the cells were used for further treatment.
      
      
        Cell cycle analysis
        Cell cycle regulation was measured as previously described [47]. Briefly, the cells were plated into 100 mm dishes at 1 × 106 cells in RPMI 1640. The cells were treated with 1 μM rhBMP-2 for 0, 12, 24, 48, or 72 h and then stained with propidium iodide (Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO, USA). The percentage of cells was measured with a FACStar flow cytometer (Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) and analyzed using Becton-Dickinson software (Lysis II, Cellfit) as described previously [48].
      
      
        Soft agar colony formation assays
        Colony formation assay in soft agar was assessed as described previously [7, 49]. Briefly, the bottom layers of the agarose gel consisted of 2 mL serum-supplemented medium and 0.4% agar. Top layers contained 1 mL serum-supplemented medium and 0.35% agar containing 2.5 × 104 cells with or without 1 μM rhBMP-2. Cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere for four weeks. Colonies were counted under light microscopy and photographed.
      
      
        RNA isolation, microarray experiments, and gene expression data
        Total RNA was extracted using MirVana™ miRNA isolation labeling kits (Ambion Inc., Austin, TX, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol. Microarrays were performed as described previously [50]. The total RNA (500 ng) was used for labeling (Total Prep RNA amplification kit, Ambion Inc.) and hybridization (Illumina Human-12 BeadChip V.4 microarray, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer's protocols. Gene expression data were extracted using GenomeStudio software (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), and the data were normalized using the quantile normalization method in the Linear Models for Microarray data package in the R language environment (http://www.r-project.org). Cluster and Treeview programs were used to generate heat maps of the gene expression data [51]. A network analysis used the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems Inc., QIAGEN Silicon Valley, CA, USA). Microarray studies were performed by the Shared Research Equipment Assistance Program, Korea Basic Science Institute, MEST.
      
      
        Real-time RT-PCR
        A real-time RT-PCR analysis was performed as described previously [52]. Briefly, a total of 1 μg RNA was reverse transcribed in 20 μL reactions using PrimeScript RT reagent kits (TaKaRa, Japan) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Real-time PCR was performed in 10 μL reactions (1 μL cDNA, 5 μL 2x SYBR Premix Ex Taq II, 0.4 μL each 10 μmol/L forward and reverse primers, 0.2 μL Rox Reference Dye, and 3 μL H2O) using an ABI Prism 7900 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The PCR program was 30 s at 95°C, 15 s at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C for 40 cycles. Data analyses were performed using the comparative Ct method with normalization to GAPDH expression for each sample. The following primers were used to amplify each gene:
        BMP-2: sense 5′-TCAAGCCAAACACAAACAGC and antisense 5′- AGCCACAATCCAGTCATTCC;
        c-Myc: sense 5′-CAGCTGCTTAGACGCTGGATT and antisense 5′-GTAGAAATACGGCTGCACCGA-3′;
        Aurora A: sense 5′-GAATGCTGTGTGTCTGTCCG and antisense 5′-GCCTCTTCTGTATCCCAAGC;
        Aurora B: sense 5′-GATGACTTTGAGATTGGGCG and antisense 5′-GGGACTTGAAGAGGACCTTG.
      
      
        Western blotting
        Western blots were performed as described previously [49, 50]. Briefly, the cells were seeded at 1 × 106 cells in 10 cm culture dishes. After 24 h, cells were treated with or without 1 μM rhBMP-2 for 72 h. Cells were washed with PBS and harvested. Pellets were lysed in ice-cold PRO-PREP™ (iNtRON Biotechnology, Seoul, South Korea), and the extracts were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and the protein concentration determined using BSA protein assay kits (Pierces Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL, USA). The proteins were separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Buckinghamshire, UK). After blocking with 5% skim milk for 1 h, the blots were probed with primary antibodies against BMP-2, BMPRII, p-Smad1/5/8, β-catenin, p-β-catenin, ERK1/2, p-ERK1/2, c-Myc, Aurka, or Aurkb overnight followed by incubation with secondary antibody-horseradish peroxidase conjugate for 1 h. Immunoreactivity was detected using chemiluminescence kits (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL, USA).
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        Each experiment was repeated more than three times. The results represent the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Comparisons among the groups were performed using a one-way ANOVA with a Student's t-test. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS FIGURE
      
        
      
    
  
        Transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) functions as a Mg2+/Ca2+-permeable channel fused with a kinase domain and regulates various physical processes and diseases. However, its effects on pathogenesis of human bladder cancer (BCa) has not been clarified yet. Our microarray analysis has suggested that calcium signaling pathway is connected with bladder cancer via MAPK pathway. Therefore, we aim to investigate the mechanism of TRPM7 in BCa tumorigenesis by using BCa tissues compared with normal bladder epithelium tissues, as well as using distinct BCa cell lines (EJ, 5637 and T24). We observed increased TRPM7 expression and dysregulation of proteins involved in Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) in BCa tissues. Moreover, knockdown of TRPM7 in BCa cells reversed the EMT status, accompanied by increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, TRPM7 deficiency could inhibit BCa cell proliferation, migration and invasion, as well as induce p-ERK1/2 and suppress PI3K/AKT at the protein level. Downregulation of TRPM7 promoted cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and apoptosis in vitro, which could be recovered by pre-treatment with U0126 to deactivate ERK1/2, suggesting a close correlation between TRPM7 and the MAPK signaling pathway. Furthermore, a NOD/SCID mouse model transplanted using the BCa cells was established, revealing delayed tumor growth by reduced protein activity and mRNA transcription of TRPM7 in vivo. Our results suggested TRPM7 might be essential for BCa tumorigenesis by interfering BCa cell proliferation, motility and apoptosis.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Bladder cancer (BCa) is one of the most common cancers worldwide [1]. Despite recent progress, the molecular mechanism underlying BCa pathogenesis remains to be further elucidated. Therefore, our group has generated a microarray analysis using total RNA isolated from several bladder cancer tissues comparing with normal bladder epithelium [2], suggesting calcium signaling pathway was linked with bladder cancer via MAPK signaling pathway, which was connected with cell cycle.
      Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play a key role in signal transduction from cell membrane to nucleus in response to a wide range of stimuli and are involved in the regulation of cell proliferation [3], survival, differentiation [4] and apoptosis [5]. Importantly, aberrant regulation of MAPK could contribute to cancer and other human diseases, including bladder cancer [6, 7]. Many studies have suggested that intracellular or extracellular calcium disorders might induce abnormal activation or deactivation of MAPK cascades [8, 9] and consequently initiate cancer development [10]. A recent publication using pathway network analyses revealed a major overlaps with various diseases and convergence upon MAPK and calcium signaling as well [11]. Studies using U0126, a selective MAPK kinase (MKK) inhibitor [12], have revealed a major effect on the deactivation of ERK1/2 [13] possibly even affecting MAPK-mediated mitochondrial-derived [14] and endoplasmic reticulum stress induced apoptosis [15].
      Transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) is a member of “chanzymes”, which function as a Mg2+/Ca2+-permeable channel fused with a kinase. TRPM7 has been reported to be ubiquitously expressed in various human tissues [16–18], suggesting that it could be implicated in important physiological processes such as cellular Mg2+ homeostasis [18], cell viability and growth [19], anoxic neuronal cell death [20], and cell adhesion [21]. Recent studies indicated a close correlation between TRPM7 and cancer, demonstrating its involvement in retinoblastoma [22], gastric cancer [23], breast cancer [24–27], nasopharyngeal carcinoma [28], pancreatic cancer [29], prostate cancer [30], and ovarian carcinoma [31]. Our previous studies have suggested that knockdown of TRPM8, another important subtype of the TRPM family, could inhibit proliferation of osteosarcoma and prostate cancer cells [32, 33]. In addition, our studies have suggested that TRPM7 affects kidney injury [34], revealing a correlation between the TRPM family and cell ability [35], cell growth as well as Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) [36], which was involved in malignancy of tumor. Another publication has reported that during stress condition, such as brain ischaemia, TRPM7 could control the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [37], which could have a Cross Talk with the EMT [38]. TRPM7 has been reported to be expressed in human and mouse urothelium [39, 40], as well as in MBT-2 mouse bladder cancer cells and T24 human bladder cancer cells [41], but its effect and mechanism in human bladder cancer remain largely unknown. Therefore, we hypothesized that TRPM7, which is involved in the calcium signaling pathway, could affect bladder cancer by the MAPK signaling pathway to trigger BCa cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. We aim to identify the alteration of TRPM7 and related proteins involved in the EMT regulation using BCa tissues in vivo, and to observe its effects on EMT, cell migration/invasion, apoptosis and cell cycle in distinct BCa cell lines in vitro for a potential strategy of rescue experiment, as well as to analyze the influence of tumor growth using nude mice in vivo with deactivated TRPM7 and downregulated TRPM7 at transcriptional level.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Microarray analysis revealed calcium and MAPK signaling pathways as central regulators in BCa development
        Three BCa tissues (stage II) and three normal bladder tissues were collected for alterations of mRNA by microarray analysis (Approval in Supplementary Information S1), suggesting 1338 genes (fold change > 1.5) (Supplementary Information S2) and 146 signaling pathways were significantly affected in the BCa tissues (Supplementary Information S3). Using a GCBI analysis tool, a pathway network connected to BCa was generated (Figure 1), indicating that a calcium signaling pathway was correlated with BCa via the MAPK signaling pathway connected with cell cycle regulation, as well as a central role of calcium and MAPK signaling pathways involved in the development of BCa. In addition, by annotation and overrepresentation analysis using our raw microarray data and DAVID database, we observed the genes involved in calcium signaling pathway were altered (Supplementary Figure S1A), accompanied by significantly upregulation of CALM, CaN and CAMK under the deficiency of TRPM7 in vitro (Supplementary Figure S1B–S1C). Therefore, we would like to investigate the alterations of the genes and proteins related with the pathways using bladder tissues and distinct BCa cell lines.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Microarray analysis using mRNA isolated from BCa tissues and normal bladder epithelium tissues
            From the microarray results, 1338 genes (fold change > 1.5, Supplementary Information 2) and 146 signaling pathways (Supplementary Information 3) were screened out. Gene ontology (GO) and Go-map network analysis by using the GCBI analysis tool suggested the calcium signaling pathway was at a central position associated with bladder cancer via the MAPK signaling pathway.
          
          
        
      
      
        Induction of TRPM7 and dysregulation of EMT markers in BCa tissues
        Immunofluorescence staining using ten BCa tissues and ten normal bladder tissues revealed a strong increase of OCT-4 in the cytoplasmic region of the BCa tissues (representative staining in Figure 2C–2D). Distinct human BCa cell lines (from high malignancy to low malignancy: T24, 5637, EJ, UM-UC-3, BIU-87, RT-4) and immortalized normal uroepithelial cell line (SV-HUC-1) exhibited a downregulation tendency of OCT-4 by Western blot analysis (Figure 2B), suggesting OCT-4 could be a marker for bladder cancer. qRT-PCR revealed that transcription of TRPM7 was upregulated in the BCa tissues compared with the normal bladder tissues (Figure 2A). TRPM7 was also induced in cytomembrane of the OCT4-positive cells in the BCa tissues (representative staining in Figure 2E a-b). Immunofluorescence analysis also suggested that distribution of proteins (E-cadherin and N-cadherin) involved in EMT process was strongly altered (representative staining in Figure 2E c-f). We observed a reduction of E-cadherin (Figure 2E c-d) and an increase of N-cadherin (Figure 2E e-f) in the OCT-4 positive cells in BCa tissues.
        
          Figure 2
          
            TRPM7 is upregulated in the BCa tissues and correlated with EMT markers
            (A) qRT-PCR analysis of relative gene expression of TRPM7 in total RNA isolated from ten BCa tissues at stage II, comparing with ten normal bladder tissues. Significance of TRPM7 expression difference was analyzed using T-test. *p < 0.05. (B) Western blot analysis of OCT-4 protein abundance in the human BCa cell lines (T24, 5637, EJ, UM-UC-3, BIU-87, RT-4) and immortalized normal uroepithelial cell line (SV-HUC-1), cell types and protein masses were indicated. (C–D) Representative immunofluorescence staining of OCT-4 (red) in the BCa tissue (D) comparing with the normal bladder tissue (C). Nuclears were stained by DAPI (blue). The images were photographed by fluorescence microscopy. The scale bar for C and D is 25 μm. (E) Representative double immunofluorescence staining of TRPM7, E-cadherin and N-cadherin (green) in the BCa tissues (b, d, f) comparing with normal bladder tissues (a, c, e). OCT-4 (red) was used as a marker of BCa cells, suggesting upregulation of TRPM7 and N-cadherin in the OCT-4 positive BCa cells (b and f), whereas a downregulation of E-cadherin (d). Nuclears were stained by DAPI (blue). The scale bar for E (a-f) is 50 μm.
          
          
        
      
      
        Downregulation of TRPM7 reversed dysregulation of EMT markers in vitro
        To investigate the effects of TRPM7 in BCa, a model of TRPM7 deficiency in distinct BCa cell lines (T24, EJ and 5637) was established by siRNA transfection. The knockdown efficiency of the siRNA was validated by qRT-PCR (Figure 3B), Western blot analysis (Figure 3A), and immunofluorescence staining (representative staining in Figure 3C), indicating TRPM7 was remarkably silenced both at gene transcription and translation levels in the three BCa cells transfected by the siRNA. In contrast to the decrease of E-cadherin and increase of N-cadherin noticed in the BCa tissues (Figure 2E c-f). Knockdown of TRPM7 triggered strong upregulation of the epithelial marker E-cadherin and considerable downregulation of the two mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and Vimentin, revealed by Western blot analysis (Figure 3D) and immunofluorescence staining (representative staining in Figure 3E–3G), suggesting reduced TRPM7 could alleviate malignancy of the BCa cells.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Knockdown of TRPM7 reversed EMT status and alleviated malignancy in BCa cells
            (A–C) Efficiency of TRPM7 knockdown by siRNA treatment in distinct BCa cells (T24, EJ, 5637) was verified by Western blot, qRT-PCR and double immunofluorescence staining analysis. (A) Western blot analysis revealed a strongly decreased protein abundance of TRPM7 by the siTRPM7 treatment, comparing with parental and siCON treatment. GAPDH was used as a loading control (cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated). (B) The relative gene expression of TRPM7 after siRNA treatment was analyzed by qRT-PCR, indicating a significantly downregulation of TRPM7 at gene expression level in the three BCa cells. Values shown were mean ± SD of triplicate measurements and repeated three times with similar results. Statistical significance was calculated using ANOVA. **p < 0.01. (C) Representative double immunofluorescence staining of TRPM7 (green) and GAPDH (red) in the 5637 cells after siTRPM7 treatment (KD) (b), comparing with siCON treatment (NC) (a). Nuclears were stained by TOTO-3 (blue). The images were photographed by confocal microscopy. The scale bar for C (a-b) is 10 μm. The effect on EMT markers (E-cadherin, N-cadherin and Vimentin) in the BCa cells by TRPM7 deficiency was investigated by Western blot and double immunofluorescence staining analysis. (D) Protein abundance of E-cadherin was increased by the siTRPM7 treatment in the three cell lines, in contrast, a reduce of N-cadherin and Vimentin was noted by the Western blot analysis. GAPDH abundance was used as a control. Cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated. (E–G) Representative double immunofluorescence staining for E-cadherin (E), N-cadherin (F) and Vimentin (G) (green) in the 5637 cells after siTRPM7 treatment (KD) (b) compared with siCON treatment (NC) (a). Nuclears were stained by DAPI (blue). The images were photographed by fluorescence microscopy. The scale bars for E-G are 15 μm.
          
          
        
      
      
        Induction of ROS in BCa cells with TRPM7 deficiency
        The status of ROS in the BCa cells (T24 and EJ) were measured by flow cytometry analysis (Supplementary Figure S2A) and fluorescence staining (Supplementary Figure S2C). Statistical analysis (Supplementary Figure S2B) revealed a significantly increase ROS in the siTRPM7-treated BCa cells by the flow cytometry measurement. Western blot analysis indicated an increased protein abundance of Catalase and SOD2 in the BCa cells with downregulated TRPM7 (Supplementary Figure S2D).
      
      
        TRPM7 deficiency impaired BCa cells motility and invasion via the PI3K/AKT pathway
        The relationship between TRPM7 and BCa cell motility and invasion was investigated using transwell and wound healing assays. Transwell assay suggested that knockdown of TRPM7 in BCa cells could reduce cell migration and invasion (Figure 4A), which was confirmed by statistically analysis in Figure 4B–4C. Moreover, wound healing assay revealed that TRPM7 deficiency in BCa cells could reduce the number of migrated cells (Figure 4D). The gap closure (%) was statistically analyzed (Figure 4E). Furthermore, downregulation of p-FAK and MMP2/9 in BCa cells with siTRPM7 was noticed (Figure 4F). Interestingly, we have also observed the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, a downstream of FAK [42], was affected by TRPM7 deficiency as well, revealing a strong reduction of p-PI3K and p-AKT (Figure 4F).
        
          Figure 4
          
            TRPM7 deficiency inhibited BCa cells migration and invasion through PI3K/AKT pathway
            (A) Cell migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell assay for the parental, siCON- and siTRPM7-treated BCa cells by the transwell chamber system. Migrative and invasive cells were fixed and stained with crystal violet. Scale bar is 100 μm. The relative cell number of migration (B) and invasion (C) in each cells was statistically analyzed. Cell types and treatment of siRNA were indicated. (D) Migration of parental, siCON- and siTRPM7-treated BCa cells was determined at 0, 12 and 24 h by wound healing assay and the gap closure was statistically analyzed (E). All values for statistical analysis shown were mean ± SD of triplicate measurements and repeated three times with similar results. Statistical significance was calculated using ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (F) Western blot analysis for protein abundance of phosphorylated and total PI3K, AKT, FAK, as well as MMP2/9 in parental, siCON- and siTRPM7-treated BCa cells. GAPDH was used as a loading control (cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated).
          
          
        
      
      
        Knockdown of TRPM7 triggered G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in the BCa cells
        CCK-8 assay revealed that TRPM7 deficiency induced inhibition of cell growth, compared with the parental and siCON cells (Figure 5A). To better understand the underlying mechanism, the effects of TRPM7 on cell cycle (Figure 5B) and apoptosis (Figure 6A–6B) were analyzed using flow cytometry analysis. Compared with the control cells, knockdown of TRPM7 in the BCa cells triggered cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase (statistically analyzed in Figure 5B) as well as a reduction in the proportion of cells in S phase. Indeed, cell cycle related proteins such as Cyclin D1 and CDK2/4 were decreased in the BCa cells with TRPM7 knockdown (Figure 5C). Moreover, TRPM7 deficiency resulted in a significant increase of the apoptotic BCa cells (Figure 6A–6B). We have analyzed the alterations of proteins involved in the apoptosis by Western blot (Figure 6C–6D), exhibiting upregulation of the apoptosis inducer BAX [43, 44] and downregulation of the apoptosis inhibitor BCL2 [45, 46] in the siTRPM7-treated BCa cells. Furthermore, pro-caspase 3, a downstream protein of BCL2 and BAX in the apoptotic cascade [47], was decreased, and its active form cleaved-caspase 3 was increased (Figure 6C). Moreover, we have found that Cytochrome C was also upregulated, suggesting that TRPM7 deficiency could trigger BCa cell apoptosis through a mitochondrial-dependent manner [48] (Figure 6C). Another key family, the MAPK including ERK1/2, JNK and p38, which are involved in the development and apoptosis regulation of tumor cells, was also altered in the siTRPM7-treated BCa cells (Figure 6D). TRPM7 deficiency strongly induced phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2) in the BCa cells, with only a mild impact on p-JNK and p-p38.
        
          Figure 5
          
            Downregulation of TRPM7 repressed cell proliferation by triggering cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase in the BCa cells
            (A) Viability of cells transfected with siTRPM7 from day 1 until day 5 was analyzed by CCK-8 assay, comparing with siCON and parental cells. (B) Flow cytometry analysis for the BCa cells treated with siTRPM7 for 48 h compared with siCON and parental cells. Percentages (%) of cell populations at different stages of cell cycles were listed within the panels. All histograms revealed the percentage (%) of cell populations from three independent experiments. Cell types and treatment of siRNA were indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (C) Downregulation of protein abundance involved in the cell cyle regulation (CDK2, CDK4 and CCND1, also written as Cyclin D1) in the BCa lacking TRPM7 was revealed by Western blot analysis. GAPDH abundance was used as a control. Cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 6
          
            TRPM7 deficiency induced BCa cell apoptosis via ERK1/2 pathway
            (A) Representative flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis stained with Annexin V and PI in parental, siCON- and siTRPM7-transfected BCa cells. (B) Statistical analysis of apoptotic rate (%) in the three BCa cell lines after the siRNA treatment. Cell types and treatment of siRNA were indicated. The values shown were mean ± SD of triplicate measurements and repeated three times with similar results. Statistical significance was calculated using ANOVA. **p <0.01. (C) Western blot analysis for proteins involvement in mitochondrial dependent apoptotic pathway, such as BAX, BCL2, Cytochrome C and related proteins pro-caspase 3 and cleaved-caspase 3. (D) Proteins in the MAPK family were affected indicated by Western blot analysis. Phosphorylated and total ERK1/2, JNK and p38 at protein level was analyzed, suggesting a dominated activation of ERK1/2 in the MAPK family by the siTRPM7. GAPDH abundance was used as a control. Cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated.
          
          
        
      
      
        Downregulation of TRPM7 induced BCa cell apoptosis through activation of ERK1/2
        We have pre-treated the BCa cells using U0126 to repress the activity of ERK1/2 and transfected with siTRPM7 and controls, revealing a significant recovery of cell growth delay triggered by TRPM7 deficiency in all the three BCa cells indicated by the CCK-8 assay (Figure 7A). Importantly, flow cytometry analysis exhibited that deactivation of ERK1/2 through pre-treatment with the U0126 (Figure 7B), could reverse TRPM7 deficiency induced apoptosis (statistically analyzed in Figure 7C), as demonstrated by reduced p-ERK1/2 and reversed BAX/BCL2 ratio, as well as decreased Cytochrome C and cleaved-caspase 3 using Western blot analysis (Figure 7D).
        
          Figure 7
          
            Recovering siTRPM7-induced BCa cell apoptosis by U0126 to deactivate ERK1/2
            (A) T24, EJ, 5637 cells were pre-treated by U0126 at 10 mM for 2 h and treated by siTRPM7 for 48 h, comparing with siCON and parental cells. Proliferation of the BCa cells were analyzed by CCK-8 assay. Cell types and treatment of siRNA were indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (B) Apoptotic cells staining with Annexin V and PI were revealed by flow cytometry analysis and the apoptotic rates were statistically analyzed (C). Values of statistical data shown were mean ± SD of triplicate measurements and repeated three times with similar results. Statistical significance was calculated using ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (D) Western blot analysis for phosphorylated and total ERK1/2 as well as mitochondrial dependent apoptotic pathway proteins (BAX, BCL2, Cytochrome C, pro-caspase 3 and cleaved-caspase 3). GAPDH abundance was used as a control. Cell types, treatment of siRNA and protein masses were indicated.
          
          
        
      
      
        Reduction of either TRPM7 protein activity by carvacrol or TRPM7 gene transcription by lentiviral-shRNA could inhibit bladder cancer growth in vivo
        To further analyze the effects of TRPM7 activity in BCa tumorigenesis in vivo, a NOD/SCID mouse model transplanted with T24 cells was established (Figure 8A– 8B). Two weeks after the transplantation, carvarcrol was intraperitoneally injected in the mice to inhibit the activity of TRPM7 (Figure 8A–8B, b). In contrast, other mice transplanted with T24 were injected by saline as control (Figure 8A–8B, a). The difference of tumor size for the carvacrol treated mice and the control mice was statistically analyzed in Figure 8C, suggesting a reduced tumor growth by the deactivation of TRPM7 protein in vivo. In addition, we also transplanted the T24 cells infected with lentiviral-TRPM7-shRNA (T24 LV-M7sh) to observe the tumor growth under downregulation of TRPM7 at transcriptional level (Figure 8D–8E). We noticed significantly decreased tumor size (Figure 8F) and weight (Figure 8G) triggered by TRPM7 deficiency comparing with the control group (T24 LV-NC).
        
          Figure 8
          
            Deactivation of TRPM7 by carvacrol and decreased TRPM7 by lentiviral-shRNA suppressed bladder cancer growth in vivo
            (A) Nude mice were subcutaneously transplanted with T24 cell for 14 days, and continueouslly intraperitoneally injected by carvacrol for 28 days (b) compared with injection by saline (a) as a control. (B) Dissected tumor from the nude mice injected by carvacrol (b) and saline (a). (C) Statistical analysis of tumor size (mm3) measured by a caliper and calculated using t-test, *p < 0.05. Days after T24 cell transplantation, tumor size and saline / carvacrol injection were indicated. (D) Nude mice were subcutaneously transplanted with T24 cell infected by lentiviral-TRPM7-shRNA (T24 LV-M7sh) for 42 days (b) compared with lentiviral-control-shRNA (T24 LV-NC) (a). (E) Dissected tumor from the nude mice injected by lentiviral-TRPM7-shRNA (T24 LV-M7sh) (b) and lentiviral-control-shRNA (T24 LV-NC) (a). Statistical analysis of tumor size (F) and tumor weight (G), calculated using t-test, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. Days after T24 cell transplantation, tumor size and types of lentiviral-shRNA infection were indicated.
          
          
        
      
      
        Overexpression of TRPM7 induced BCa cell proliferation and motility
        BCa cells (T24 and EJ) were transfected with pcDNA5/FRT/TO/HA-TRPM7 vector to overexpress TRPM7 (Supplementary Figure S3A), which could trigger significantly increased cell proliferation revealed by CCK- 8 assay (Supplementary Figure S3B) and clonogenic survival assay (Supplementary Figure S3C). Induction of T24 and EJ cell migration rates was suggested by transwell migration assay, confirmed by the statistically analysis (Supplementary Figure S3D).
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      The TRPM family, an essential family of proteins exhibited distinct functions on tumorigenesis [49, 50]. Our group has reported that the TRPM family could regulate cell cycle and growth in human osteosarcoma and prostate cancer cells [32, 51]. The present study aims to investigate the effect and mechanism of TRPM7, an important TRPM family member involved in Ca2+-permeable channel, on human bladder cancer, which remains largely unknown yet. Microarray analysis using human bladder cancer tissues compared with normal bladder epithelium tissues has suggested a close correlation between calcium signaling pathway and bladder cancer via MAPK signaling pathway, confirmed by overrepresentation using microarray raw data and DAVID database. We analyzed gene expression and protein abundance of TRPM7 in BCa tissues, observing a strong upregulation of TRPM7 at the gene expression and protein level by double immunofluorescence staining analysis, co-localized with OCT-4, a potential marker for BCa cells [52, 53]. Moreover, we noticed the upregulation of TRPM7 may be correlated with the EMT markers in the BCa tissue, which could reveal the malignancy of tumor [54, 55].
      We have selected three typical BCa cell lines with distinguished malignancy, T24, EJ and 5637, to generate the BCa cell model with TRPM7 deficiency using siRNA transfection. Indeed, we confirmed that knockdown of TRPM7 in the three BCa cell lines at gene expression and protein levels. Moreover, downregulation of TRPM7 resulted in a reversed status for the EMT markers, suggesting deficiency of TRPM7 could alleviate malignancy of BCa. Furthermore, our results revealed a significant increase of ROS status and protein abundance involved in the ROS metabolism in the BCa cells with downregulated TRPM7, suggesting a correlation between TRPM7 and ROS in BCa cells.
      Knockdown of TRPM7 could reverse EMT markers in the three BCa cells, and we also observed that TRPM7 deficiency could also inhibit migration and invasion of BCa cells, as EMT has been reported to play a critical role in cancer cell migration and invasion [56]. To confirm the effect triggered by siTRPM7 treatment, we have established a BCa cell model with TRPM7-overexpression and noticed the migration rate was significantly increased. Moreover, treatment of siTRPM7 could also reduce MMP2/9 and phosphorylated FAK, PI3K, AKT in the BCa cells. Recent studies suggested FAK is a participant in focal adhesion dynamics between cells, playing a key role in cell motility [57] and MMPs could degrade the extracellular matrix and promote cancer cells to metastasize [58, 59]. Another publications reported that PI3K/AKT is a key signaling pathway [60, 61], which was deactivated by the TRPM7 deficiency in our study as well, suggesting that inhibited BCa cell motility triggered by TRPM7 knockdown could be via the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
      A major effect of TRPM7 was to induce delayed cell proliferation, cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and apoptosis in the BCa cells with TRPM7 deficiency. Proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, CCND1 and CDK2/4, were all reduced after the siTRPM7 treatment. Moreover, proteins involved in apoptosis were strongly altered, especially imbalance of the BAX/BCL2 ratio, which is involved in mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis [62, 63], and related proteins including cleaved-caspase 3 [64, 65] and Cytochrome C [66, 67], suggesting that TRPM7 deficiency could trigger a mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. Importantly, as suggested by our microarray analysis, MAPK signaling pathway, a central regulator in the pathway network, could be altered by the affected calcium signaling pathway due to TRPM7 knockdown. Western blot analysis indicated ERK1/2, a member of MAPK family, was remarkably increased in the phosphorylated form, suggesting knockdown of TRPM7 might induce a mitochondrial dependent apoptosis via ERK1/2, which could be activated by phosphorylation on specific sites and promote either intrinsic or extrinsic apoptotic pathways by induction of mitochondrial Cytochrome C release or caspase-8 activation, permanent cell cycle arrest or autophagic vacuolization [68].
      Therefore, we deactivated ERK1/2 by pre-treatment of U0126 in the three BCa cells and noticed a decrease of the p-ERK1/2 at protein level. Furthermore, the delayed cell growth caused by siTRPM7 was reversed significantly, and the apoptotic cell rates were significantly reduced by ERK1/2 inhibition, as well as the proteins involved in the apoptosis pathway were recovered to the level of the control group. Importantly, we have established a T24-transplanted NOD/SCID mouse model with carvacrol [69] and lentiviral-shRNA treatment respectively, observing a significant delayed tumor growth by both reduction of TRPM7 protein activity and TRPM7 gene transcription. Therefore, our results in vitro and in vivo have revealed that the downregulation of TRPM7 could reduce the BCa cell proliferation, trigger cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. In conclusion, downregulated TRPM7 could reduce the activity of bladder cancer cells and induce cell apoptosis via ERK1/2 pathway.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Ethical statement for human bladder tissue samples
        Three stage II bladder cancer tissue samples and three normal bladder tissue samples were collected from male patients (ages 62 ± 1.581) after surgery by radical resection and male donors (ages 37 ± 2.327) undergoing transplant by accidental death, at Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects to collect the samples from the operating room and to store them in liquid nitrogen for total RNA isolation, as well as to fix the samples in 4% Paraformaldehyde (PFA) for immunofluorescence staining analysis. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee at Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University (approval number: 2015029, Supplementary Information S1) and the sample collection as well as treatment were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines.
      
      
        Ethical statement for NOD/SCID mice
        Investigation has been conducted in accordance with the ethical standards and according to the Declaration of Helsinki and according to national and international guidelines and has been approved by the author's institutional review board. Male NOD/SCID mice in this study were purchased from Beijing HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd. in Beijing, China (http://www.hfkbio.com/en/).
      
      
        Human bladder cancer cell lines
        Human bladder cancer cell lines EJ cells (carcinoma, Cat. #CL-0274) and BIU-87 (Cat. #CL-0035) were purchased from the Procell Co., Ltd. in Wuhan, China. The T24 (transitional cell carcinoma, Cat. #SCSP-536), 5637 (grade II carcinoma, Cat. #TCHu1), UM-UC-3 (Cat. #TCHu217), RT-4 (Cat. #TCHu226) and SV-HUC-1 (Cat. #TCHu169) were kindly provided by the Stem Cell Bank, Chinese Academy of Sciences in Shanghai, China. Identification of the BCa cell lines was at the China Centre for Type Culture Collection in Wuhan, China. The EJ, BIU-87, T24, 5637 and SV-HUC-1 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, China), UM-UC-3 cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Gibco, China) and RT-4 cells were cultured in McCoy's 5A Medium (Gibco, China) containing 1% penicillin G sodium/streptomycin sulphate and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, Australia) in a humidified atmosphere consisting of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37°C.
      
      
        RNA expression analyses
      
      
        Total RNA isolation from bladder tissues and BCa cells
        Total RNA was isolated from bladder tissues and distinct BCa cells using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Cat #74101), combined with QIAshredder from Qiagen (Cat #79654) using a centrifuge (Eppendorf, Cat #5424) to increase the quantity and quality of isolated total RNA, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Each RNA sample was digested by DNase I (RNase-Free DNase Set, Qiagen, Cat #79254) to remove possible contamination of genomic DNA. The quantity of isolated RNA was measured by a NanoDrop® ND-1000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).
      
      
        Microarray analysis of mRNA isolated from human bladder tissues
        Our group has established a microarray analysis using mRNA isolated from the three stage II bladder cancer tissues and the three normal bladder tissues, as described by Wang et al. in 2016 [2]. Briefly, according to the standard Affymetrix protocol, 250 ng total RNA of each sample was prepared to biotinylated cDNA by Ambion® WT Expression Kit. On GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0, 5.5 μg of cDNA were hybridized for 16 h at 45°C, continuously washed and stained in the Affymetrix Fluidics Station 450, scanned by using Affymetrix® GeneChip Command Console (AGCC) installed in GeneChip® Scanner 3000 (7G). Data analysis was with a Robust Multichip Analysis (RMA) algorithm using Affymetrix default analysis settings and global scaling as normalization method. By Gene ontology (GO) and pathway-Relation-Network (Path-net) analysis tools based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway Database using Gene Cloud of Biotechnology Information (GCBI Plateform, Shanghai, China) [70], genes and pathways correlated with bladder cancer were generated. The resulting gene list was subjected to the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [71] as well for annotation and overrepresentation analysis of the genes involved in calcium signaling pathway (Supplementary Figure S2). The microarray data was submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database with accession number GSE76211. All data are MIAME compliant.
      
      
        Reverse transcription and quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR)
        1 μg of total RNA isolated from bladder tissues or BCa cells was mixed with oligo (dT) 12–18 primers to synthesize first-strand cDNA by using RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, China). 1 μg cDNA were used for each reaction of the polymerase chain reactions (PCR) in a final volume of 20 μl. All primers conducted with the SYBR Premix Ex Taq II (Takara Bio, China) were tested for optimal annealing temperatures and PCR conditions were optimized with gradient PCRs on a Bio-Rad iCycler (Cat. #CFX96). Primer sequences and annealing temperatures are summarized in Table 1. Values were normalized for amplified β-actin alleles. Relative gene abundance = 2−ΔΔct, Δct = cttarget gene - ctβ-actin, for BCa cells ΔΔct = ΔctsiRNA-treated - ΔctsiRNA-untreated, for bladder tissues ΔΔct = ΔctBCa tissues - Δctnormal bladder tissues (ct = threshold cycle).
        
          Table 1
          
            List of primers for qRT-PCR
          
          
            
              
                Gene
                Symbol
                Forward primer (5′–3′)
                Reverse primer (5′–3′)
                Annealing temperature (°C)
                Length (bp)
              
            
            
              
                Transient receptor potential melastatin 7
                
                  TRPM7
                
                5′- TGGATGATGGC ACTGTTGGAA −3′
                5′- CATTTGGCCC ACCCTCAAATATAA −3′
                56
                144
              
              
                Actin, beta
                
                  ACTB
                
                5′- AGAGCTACGA GCTGCCTGAC −3′
                5′- AGCACTGTGTT GGCGTACAG −3′
                56
                184
              
              
                calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II beta
                
                  CAMK II B
                
                5′- GCACACCA GGCTACCTGTC −3′
                5′- GGACGGGAAG TCATAGGCA −3′
                56
                179
              
              
                calmodulin 1
                
                  CALM1
                
                5′- TTGACTTCCCC GAATTTTTGACT −3′
                5′- GGAATGCCTCA CGGATTTCTT −3′
                56
                81
              
              
                calmodulin 3
                
                  CALM3
                
                5′- GACCATTGAC TTCCCGGAGTT −3′
                5′- GATGTAGCCATT CCCATCCTTG −3′
                56
                118
              
              
                protein phosphatase 3 catalytic subunit alpha
                
                  PPP3CA
                
                5′- CCAAGTCACC GGCTTACAG −3′
                5′- CCTCCTTCATAA GATGCGCCTT −3′
                56
                88
              
              
                protein phosphatase 3 catalytic subunit beta
                
                  PPP3CB
                
                5′- CCCCAACACATC GCTTGACAT-3′
                5′- GGCAGCACCCT CATTGATAATTC −3′
                56
                140
              
              
                protein phosphatase 3 catalytic subunit gamma
                
                  PPP3CC
                
                5′- ACCGCGTCATC AAAGCTGT-3′
                5′- CTTCCAGTCGT CCTTCCTTTAC −3′
                56
                125
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Cell culture experiments
      
      
        Knockdown and overexpression of TRPM7 in the BCa cells
        TRPM7-target specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) and lentiviral small hairpin RNA (LV-shRNA) were synthesized by Genepharma Ltd. in Suzhou, China. Distinct BCa cells (T24, EJ and 5637) were transfected with TRPM7-siRNA (siTRPM7) using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, USA), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The sense sequence of TRPM7-siRNA (siTRPM7) / TRPM7-shRNA (shTRPM7) was 5′-GUCUUGCCAUGAAAUACUCTT-3′, and the sense sequence of control-siRNA (siCON) / control-shRNA (shCON) was 5′-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCAGGUTT-3′. After transfection by siTRPM7 for 48 h, alterations of TRPM7 at transcriptional and protein levels were evaluated by the qRT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescence staining analysis. The BCa cells infected by lentiviral-TRPM7-shRNA (LV-M7sh) and lentiviral-control-shRNA (LV-NC) were treated by 0.8 mg/ml puromycin (Sigma, USA) for 14 days to select the antibiotic-resistant cells xenotransplanted into NOD/SCID mice.
        The plasmid of TRPM7-overexpression (pcDNA5/FRT/TO/HA-TRPM7 vector) was a gift from Professor Loren W. Runnels at University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, USA. The cell model of TRPM7-overexpression was established according to Su et al. [72] from the group of Professor Runnels. Briefly, the BCa cells (EJ and T24) were transfected by the pcDNA5/FRT/TO/HA-TRPM7 vector and induced by 1 mg/ml tetracyclines for 48 h.
      
      
        Pre-treatment using MKK inhibitor for rescue experiments
        Before siRNA transfection, BCa cells were pre-treated by MKK inhibitor U0126 (Sigma, USA) at 10 mM for 2 h to deactivate ERK1/2 [13, 73, 74]. BCa cells in the untreated group were pre-incubated with appropriate amount of vehicle (0.1% DMSO). Both groups were submitted for the RNA interference and alterations of cell viability and apoptosis were measured by CCK-8 assay and flow cytometry analysis, respectively.
      
      
        Wound healing assay
        When the BCa cells grew to 95% confluence, a 200 μl pipette tip was used to scratch a wound to cell monolayer. After scratching, cells were washed with PBS several times to remove non-adherent debris, then 0.5% FBS medium was added to allow cells to move into the gap without the influence of serum. Four different equidistant points of the scratched area were photographically measured and imaged by an inverted phase contrast microscope (Leica, Cat. #DMI 1) at 0 h, 12 h and 24 h. Migration rate was calculated as the proportion of initial scratch distant of each sample using the mean distance between both borderlines that remain cell-free after cell migration.
      
      
        Transwell migration assay
        A 24-well plate transwell chamber system (Corning, USA) with 8.0 μm pore size was used. Cells were suspended in 0.5% FBS medium at a density of 5 × 105 cell/ml and 100 μl cell suspension was seeded in the upper chamber insert without ligand, while the lower chamber was filled with 10% FBS medium. After 24 h incubation at 37°C, cells on the upper insert were removed by cotton swabs, and cells that migrated to the lower side were fixed with 4% PFA and stained with crystal violet. Then the chambers were placed under an inverted phase contrast microscope and 16 random areas were selected to observe and count the migrated cells.
      
      
        Transwell invasion assay
        In transwell invasion analysis, 40 μl ECM gel solution (Sigma, USA) diluted to a concentration of 1 mg/ml was coated on the surface of the upper insert of Transwell chamber and placed in a 37°C incubator for overnight. BCa cells were then suspended in 0.5°C FBS medium at a density of 8 × 105 cell/ml and 100 μl cell suspension was seeded in the upper chamber insert. After incubation 48 h at 37°C, cells were fixed, stained and counted under an inverted phase contrast microscope.
      
      
        CCK-8 assay
        Cell Counting Kit-8 (Roche Biochemicals, Germany) was used for cell viability measurement. 100 μl cell suspensions (2 × 104 cells per ml) with 10% FBS medium was seeded to a 96-well plate and incubated for 5 days at 37°C. Then, 10 μl CCK-8 reagent was added to each well at the indicated time and incubated for 4 h at 37°C. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a Rayto-6000 system (Rayto, China).
      
      
        Clonogenic survival assay
        BCa cells were seeded in 6-well plates (1500 cells per well) and grew into colonies for approximately 15 days. Colonies were emerged and fixed by 4% PFA for 30 min, staining with crystal violet, counted and defined as aggregates of 50 or more cells and photographed.
      
      
        Flow cytometry analysis for alterations of cell cycle and apoptosis
        For cell cycle analysis, 1 × 106 cells were harvested and fixed in 70% ice cold ethanol at −20°C for overnight. After centrifugation, pellets were resuspended with PBS containing 50 μg/ml propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and 0.1 mg/ml RNaseA (20 μg/ml in PBS) in the dark. After incubation at 37°C for 30 min, the DNA content distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry analysis (Beckman, Cat. #FC500). For apoptosis analysis, after transfection for 48 h, cells were collected, washed with PBS, and stained with FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit I (BD biosciences, USA) and analyzed by the flow cytometry analysis.
      
      
        ROS detection by staining with DCFH-DA
        The fluorescent probe 2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) was used to evaluate intracellular ROS levels. BCa cells transfected with siTRPM7 and siCON were used for this experiment. After transfection of cells and growth for 48 h, 10 μmol of DCFH-DA (Sigma, USA) was added to 2 ml medium, and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Thereafter, the cells were washed three times with PBS and submitted to flow cytometry analysis. For ROS staining, slides with the BCa cells were stained by DCFH-DA and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, then washed by PBS three times. Nuclei were counterstained with 1 μM DAPI for 20 min at room temperature. Images were taken with a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Cat. #IX73).
      
      
        Protein analyses
      
      
        Isolation of total protein from BCa cells and Western blot analysis
        The BCa cells (T24, EJ and 5637) were sonicated and lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) on ice for 30 min, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min to collect supernatant. By Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Germany) the concentrations of protein were determined using Bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. The isolated total protein was resolved using 6–15% SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membrane (Millipore, USA). Membranes were blocked by 5% non-fat milk and incubated with primary antibodies (Table 2) at 4°C for overnight. After washing, the membranes were incubated with secondary antibody (listed in Table 3) at room temperature for 2 h. Bands were visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit (Bio-rad, USA) and detected by Kodak Biomax MR films.
        
          Table 2
          
            List of primary antibodies
          
          
            
              
                Antigens
                Species antibodies raised in
                Dilution (IF)
                Dilution (WB)
                Supplier
              
            
            
              
                Akt (pan), mouse
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4691
              
              
                Bax, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #5023
              
              
                Bcl-2, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #2872
              
              
                Caspase-3, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #9665
              
              
                Cytochrome c, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:500
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4280
              
              
                CDK2, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #2546
              
              
                CDK4, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #12790
              
              
                Cleaved Caspase-3, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:500
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #9664
              
              
                Cyclin D1, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #2978
              
              
                E-cadherin, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                1:200
                1:500
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #3195
              
              
                FAK, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #13009
              
              
                Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), human
                Mouse, monoclonal
                1:200
                1:2,000
                Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., USA, Cat. #sc-365062
              
              
                MMP-2, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:500
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #13132
              
              
                MMP-9, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #13667
              
              
                N-cadherin, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                1:200
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #13116
              
              
                OCT-4, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                1:200
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #2750
              
              
                OCT-4, human
                Mouse, monoclonal
                1:200
                -
                Novus Biologicals, USA, Cat. #NB110-90606
              
              
                p38 MAPK, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #8690
              
              
                p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2), rat
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4695
              
              
                Phospho-Akt (Ser473), human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4060
              
              
                Phospho-FAK (Tyr397), human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #8556
              
              
                Phospho-p38 (Thr180/Tyr182), human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4511
              
              
                Phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204), human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4370
              
              
                Phospho-PI3 Kinase p85 (Tyr458)/p55 (Tyr199), mouse
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4228
              
              
                Phospho-SAPK/JNK (Thr183/Tyr185), human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4668
              
              
                PI3 Kinase p85, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:1,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4257
              
              
                SAPK/JNK, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #9252
              
              
                TRPM7, mouse
                Mouse, monoclonal
                1:100
                1:500
                Abcam, UK, Cat. #ab85016
              
              
                Vimentin, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                1:200
                1:2,000
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #5741
              
              
                Catalase, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1:2,000
                Abcam, UK, Cat. #ab76024
              
              
                SOD2, human
                Rabbit, monoclonal
                -
                1;1,000
                Abcam, UK, Cat. #ab68155
              
            
          
        
        
          Table 3
          
            List of secondary antibodies and counterstaining of nuclei
          
          
            
              
                Secondary detection system used
                Host
                Method
                Dilution
                Supplier
              
            
            
              
                Anti-Mouse-IgG (H+L)-HRP
                Goat
                WB
                1:10,000
                Sungene Biotech, China, Cat. #LK2003
              
              
                Anti-Rabbit-IgG (H+L)-HRP
                Goat
                WB
                1:10,000
                Sungene Biotech, China, Cat. #LK2001
              
              
                Anti-rabbit IgG (H+L), F(ab')2 Fragment (Alexa Fluor® 488 Conjugate)
                Goat
                IF
                1:50
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4412
              
              
                Anti-rabbit IgG (H+L), F(ab')2 Fragment (Alexa Fluor® 555 Conjugate)
                Goat
                IF
                1:50
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4413
              
              
                Anti-mouse IgG (H+L), F(ab')2 Fragment (Alexa Fluor® 488 Conjugate)
                Goat
                IF
                1:50
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4407
              
              
                Anti-mouse IgG (H+L), F(ab')2 Fragment (Alexa Fluor® 555 Conjugate)
                Goat
                IF
                1:50
                Cell Signaling Technology, USA, Cat. #4408
              
              
                Hoechst 33342 nucleic acid staining (DAPI)
                -
                IF
                1:750
                Molecular Probes/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA, Cat. #A11007
              
              
                TOTO-3 iodide
                -
                IF
                1:750
                Molecular Probes/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA, Cat. #T3604
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Immunofluorescence staining for human bladder tissue samples
        Histological diagnosis of bladder tissues were examined by two experienced pathologists independently. All the samples were fixed by 4% PFA at 4°C overnight and embedded into paraffin (Paraplast, Sigma-Aldrich) using tissue processor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. #STP 120). Paraffin sections (4 μm) were cut with a rotation microtome (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. #HM325). The sections were serially incubated with indicated primary antibody (listed in Table 2) and Cy3-labeled or FITC- labeled secondary antibody (listed in Table 3) in humidified atmosphere. Nuclei were labeled with DAPI (2 μg/ml). Sections were analyzed by a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Cat. #IX73).
      
      
        Immunofluorescence analysis for BCa cells
        BCa cells were seeded on 12 mm coverslips, washed three times with ice cold PBS and fixed with 4% PFA for 30 min. Cells were then treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 solution and blocked in normal goat serum for 30 min at room temperature. Afterwards, cells were incubated with the indicated primary antibody (Table 2) at the proper dilution for 2 h at room temperature, washed three times with PBS, and incubated with Cy3-labeled or FITC- labeled secondary antibody (Table 3) for 1 h. Nuclei were visualized with 1 mM TOTO-3 iodide for 10 min at room temperature. Immunofluorescence staining was analyzed using a confocal microscope (Leica, Cat. #SP8).
      
      
        Xenograft model
        Male NOD/SCID mice were purchased from Beijing HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd. in Beijing, China. Six mice at Day 42 were subcutaneously injected with T24 cells at a concentration of 4 × 107/ml diluted in PBS (100 μl for each mouse) and grown for 14 days [75]. Three mice of them were intraperitoneally injected by carvacrol at 50 mg/ml (200 μl for each mouse) and repeated for 28 days to inhibit activity of TRPM7 [69]. The other three mice were treated by 0.9% saline (200 μl for each mouse) for 28 days as control.
        Lentiviral-TRPM7-shRNA and lentiviral-control-shRNA infected T24 cells were subcutaneously injected to ten mice, respectively, diluted in PBS (200 μl per mouse) at a concentration of 2 × 107/ml cells. The tumor size for each mouse was measured every four days using a caliper and counted as: tumor size = length × width2 × 0.5 mm3 [76]. The growth of the tumor was observed for 42 days, and the mice was sacrificed to measure the tumor weight.
      
      
        Statistical analyses
        Data were expressed as mean ± SD from three independent experiments. All analyses were performed three times and represent data from three individual experiments. Two-tailed Student's t-tests and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to evaluate the statistical significance of differences of the data. All of the statistical analyses were performed with SPSS16.0. The statistical significance was set at probability values of p < 0.05.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS AND FIGURES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        
          Background
          MicroRNAs always function cooperatively in their regulation of gene expression. Dysfunctions of these co-functional microRNAs can play significant roles in disease development. We are interested in those multi-disease associated co-functional microRNAs that regulate their common dysfunctional target genes cooperatively in the development of multiple diseases. The research is potentially useful for human disease studies at the transcriptional level and for the study of multi-purpose microRNA therapeutics.
        
        
          Methods and results
          We designed a computational method to detect multi-disease associated co-functional microRNA pairs and conducted cross disease analysis on a reconstructed disease-gene-microRNA (DGR) tripartite network. The construction of the DGR tripartite network is by the integration of newly predicted disease-microRNA associations with those relationships of diseases, microRNAs and genes maintained by existing databases. The prediction method uses a set of reliable negative samples of disease-microRNA association and a pre-computed kernel matrix instead of kernel functions. From this reconstructed DGR tripartite network, multi-disease associated co-functional microRNA pairs are detected together with their common dysfunctional target genes and ranked by a novel scoring method. We also conducted proof-of-concept case studies on cancer-related co-functional microRNA pairs as well as on non-cancer disease-related microRNA pairs.
        
        
          Conclusions
          With the prioritization of the co-functional microRNAs that relate to a series of diseases, we found that the co-function phenomenon is not unusual. We also confirmed that the regulation of the microRNAs for the development of cancers is more complex and have more unique properties than those of non-cancer diseases.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1605-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a class of small non-coding RNA of ∼22 nucleotides, are significant regulation molecules for diverse cellular processes such as cell development, proliferation and differentiation [1–7]. Pairs of miRNAs can work cooperatively to regulate an individual gene or a cohort of genes that participate in similar processes [8, 9]. This cooperativity (or co-function) is a frequent regulation mechanism of miRNAs for an enhanced target repression which has exhibited distinctive and fine-tuned target gene expression patterns [10]. Investigation on miRNA cooperativity can systematically understand miRNA functions [11] to detect their potential disease links [12].
      Using miRNAs as diagnostic and therapeutic targets, miRNA therapeutics is a promising research area that designs sophisticated strategies to restore or inhibit miRNA expression for the treatment of cancer and other diseases. For example, a therapy with the vector-encoded pair miR-15a and miR-16-1 has been proposed for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) [13]; The microRNA cluster miR-216a/217 was reported to target genes PTEN and SMAD7 to induce the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, which can promote the drug resistance and recurrence of liver cancer [14]. Such co-functional miRNA pairs are more suitable as drug targets instead of using individual ones. Large scale detection of novel co-functional miRNA pairs is an important pre-step to identify proper miRNA pairs as more effective drug targets. Currently, abundant disease-gene association information are stored in Online Mendelian Inheritance In Man (OMIM) [15] and Comparative Toxicogenomics Database(CTD) [16]; disease-miRNA associations are recorded in miR2Disease [17] and HMDD [18]; and miRNA-target regulations are recorded in miRecord [19] and miRTarBase [20]. Linking and integrating these databases, it can be inferred which diseases are correlated with the same genes or with the same miRNAs, and which miRNAs have the same target disease genes. Our hypothesis is that some of the miRNAs can regulate their common targets cooperatively and have roles in the development of a series of diseases.
      The focus of this work is on the detection and prioritization of multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs. A multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pair is a pair of miRNAs whose common target genes are associated with a series of diseases. Here, the definition of co-function for the miRNA pairs is broader than the definition of cooperativity as proposed in [21, 22]. Figure 1 shows an example of multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs detected from a disease-gene-miRNA (DGR) tripartite network. From this example, we can see that multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs may hold a vast mechanism underlying multiple disease development, similarly like the basic cellular functions maintained by housekeeping genes. More importantly, these miRNAs can be considered as the common drug targets of these diseases for the design and development of multi-purpose drugs.
Fig. 1An example: From a DGR tripartite network to a co-functional miRNA pair. The network in panel a contains known associations between the genes g1, g2, g3, g4, and g5, the diseases d1, d2, d3, and d4, and the miRNAs R1, R2, R3, and R4. In this example, miRNAs R2 and R3 are both associated with all the four diseases. However, the other three miRNAs are each associated with only one of these diseases. All these four diseases are associated with two common genes g4 and g5. Meanwhile, both of g4 and g5 are the targets of miRNAs R2 and R3. It is believed that R2-R3-g4-g5 in panel b may form a functional module that associated with the development of all the four diseases

      MiRNA co-function mechanisms have attracted intensive research recently [9, 11, 12, 23, 24], with the focus on the analysis of miRNA-target networks or on the analysis of disease-miRNA associations for a specific disease. Our work advances the current research with two steps: (i) We reconstruct a DGR tripartite network through the integration of existing databases with our newly predicted disease-miRNA associations, and (ii) we propose a novel scoring method to prioritize the potential multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs. Since the relationships between the exact miRNAs and diseases are largely unknown, computational methods are required to make prediction of disease-related miRNAs for constructing the disease-miRNA network in the DGR tripartite. For example, network-based or semi-supervised prediction methods [25–27], or the methods via support vector machines [28, 29] can be used among some other prediction methods [30–32]. The key idea in the similarity assessment adopted by most of these methods is that: similar RNAs (functionally similar) are always associated with similar diseases (phenotypically similar, genotypically similar or semantically similar). During the training of the existing prediction methods, the disease-miRNA pairs without known relationships are thought to be ranked at bad positions or are regarded as negative samples directly. As some (probably many) of the unknown disease-miRNA pairs in the training data are true in fact, the false positive rates by the literature methods are high in the prediction of disease related miRNAs. On the other hand, the use of negative samples by the literature methods is straightforward without consideration of gene expression properties of miRNAs.
      To improve the prediction performance, we propose a new method to make predictions of disease-related miRNAs. Two new ideas are explored. One is the construction of a set of reliable negative samples of disease-miRNA association through miRNA expression comparison between control and diseased subjects. The second idea is the use of precomputed kernel matrix for support vector machines, which can avoid the step to tune the parameters of the kernel functions. The area under the ROC curve(AUC) performance of our method is much superior to the literature methods on bench-marking data sets. Our case studies have demonstrated that our prediction method can also work well even when a disease has no currently known disease-related miRNAs. Combining our predicted disease-miRNA associations with those literature-maintained associations between diseases, miRNAs and genes, we construct a more complete DGR tripartite network to detect and prioritize multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs. Given a miRNA pair, our scoring method cfscore considers the function relationship between the two miRNAs, the co-dysexpression of the two miRNAs in the disease tissues and the relationship between the common target genes and the associated diseases of these miRNAs. We are also interested in finding the exact targets dysregulated by the co-functional miRNA pair during the diseases’ development. We call them the co-functional targets of the co-functional miRNA pair. The flowchart of our work is described in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2The flowchart of our prediction and scoring method. Our work includes the parts such as material collection, similarity computing, association prediction, network reconstruction, scoring and prioritization of the co-function miRNA pairs and result output

      This method was tested on the cancer and non-cancer disease related DGR tripartite networks. The top 50 multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs were concentrated for deep analysis. We found that most of them were from the same miRNA families or miRNA clusters. The comparison of the co-functional pairs from the two DGR networks suggests that the dysregulation mechanisms of miRNAs in the cancers are more complex. It has also been shown that the analysis of multi-disease associated co-functional miRNAs can help understand the regulation mechanisms of miRNAs in the development of different diseases and thus can provide new knowledge for the diagnosis or treatment of the diseases.
    
    
      Results
      
        Multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs and their common dysfunctional target genes
        Two cancer-gene-miRNA tripartite networks were constructed to investigate the performance of our method for detecting and ranking multi-cancer associated co-functional miRNA pairs. As a pre-processing step, we merged the miRCancer database [33] with miR2Disease [17] and HMDD [18], and collected 3655 cancer-miRNA associations between 83 cancers and 503 miRNAs. Connecting these miRNAs and diseases to their associated genes, the first cancer-gene-miRNA tripartite network was constructed. Then, all the 3655 cancer-miRNA associations (as positive samples) and a balanced set of 3655 negative samples of cancer-miRNA association in this tripartite network were used together to train our prediction model for inferring new cancer-miRNA associations. The prediction model was applied to all the un-connected disease-miRNA pairs between the 83 cancers and 503 miRNAs to predict whether some of them have associations or not. When a pair was predicted to have an association between a cancer and a miRNA, a probability was also estimated. A total of 3000 top-ranked associations were added to the first cancer-gene-miRNA tripartite network to form the second cancer-gene-miRNA tripartite network (i.e., a reconstructed network by adding the predicted cancer-miRNA associations). Those associations can be found in the Additional file 1.
        On average, the 503 miRNAs are associated with 7 or 13 cancers for the first and the reconstructed network respectively; and there are 2532 and 5634 miRNA pairs in these two networks that have a cfScore larger than 0 and that are associated with at least 10 cancers. There are very few literature proving the miRNA pairs can co-function in the development of more than 10 different diseases. To understand whether these miRNA pairs co-function in the development of some of the diseases, we manually searched and examined relevant literature to confirm that the individual miRNAs in the pairs can function cooperatively to regulate the same targets. Of the top-ranked 50 miRNA pairs from our reconstructed network, 40 pairs can be validated to be co-functional pairs by the literature, in comparison with 35 of the top 50 pairs from the first tripartite network. This implies that the addition of the predicted disease-miRNA associations into the tripartite network is useful and effective for the study of co-functional miRNA pairs. Here, we can just confirm these pairs of miRNAs are co-functional miRNA pairs but not multi-disease associated co-functional ones. We could not find any literature that discusses the relationship between miRNAs and a series of diseases.
        Details of the 50 miRNA pairs are shown in Fig. 3, where on the label of every edge, the first number represents the ranking position of the miRNA pair. If the rank number is followed by one or more gene names, it represents that the miRNA pair is a co-functional pair and has validated common targets. The number at the end of the label is the number of diseases that may associate with this co-functional pair. These multi-cancer associated co-functional miRNA pairs are mostly from the same clusters or families such as from the let-7 family (let-7a ∼7e and miR-98) and the miR-17 ∼92 cluster (miR-17-3p, miR-17-5p, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-19b, miR-20a and miR-92). It has been known that clustered miRNAs or those miRNAs from the same family are evolved from a common ancestor and can target functionally related genes [34]. Thus, it can be easily understood that miRNAs from the same cluster or family have similar functions and can always function cooperatively. However, not all those miRNAs in the same families or clusters can co-function with each other as their target genes are not completely overlapped. Moreover, some miRNAs that belong to different families or clusters can be co-functional miRNAs. For example, the 17th-ranked pair miR-497-5p-miR-424-5p is a co-functional miRNA pair. However, as recorded by miRBase, miR-424-5p is a member of mir-322 gene family while miR-497-5p stems from the mir-497 family. The pair is also not clustered.
Fig. 3The 50 top-ranked co-functional miRNA pairs from the reconstructed cancer-miRNA-gene network. The labels along the edges illustrate the co-function information of the miRNAs. The first number of each label is the rank of the corresponding pair according to our prioritization method. The following gene symbols are the validated common targets during the co-functioning of the pair of miRNAs. The last number shows the potential diseases that related to this co-function pair

        The 5th-ranked pair, miR-15b and miR-195, both belong to the miR-15 family, and both of them can target gene BCL2, an important apoptosis inhibitor. This pair of miRNAs can also work together with another miRNA (miR-16) in regulation [35]. We hypothesize that this co-functional pair may dysregulate their targets cooperatively, leading to the development of 38 different cancers such as prostate cancer (DOID:10283), prostate carcinoma (DOID:10286), stomach cancer (DOID:10534), and breast cancer (DOID:1612). The top three potential common targets of this miRNA pair are genes BCL2 (entrez id:596), CDKN1A (entrez id:1026), and CCND1(entrez id:595). We have verified that these three genes are individually related to most of (68%, 68% or 66%) the 38 cancers. Furthermore, these three genes are all involved in four KEGG [36] pathways: hsa05215: Prostate cancer (p-value=1.5E-4), hsa05206: MicroRNAs in cancer (p-value=1.7E-3), hsa04151: PI3K-Akt signaling pathway (p-value=2.5E-3) and hsa05200: Pathways in cancer (p-value=3.2E-3) as revealed by the DAVID functional annotation tool [37, 38]. Moreover, the three genes all have the functions of the cellular response to DNA damage stimulus (GO:0006974, p-value=1.4E-4) and response to drug (GO:0042493, p-value=4.0E-4), which are important functions for the normal cells. Based on these analysis and evidences, it is suggested that the pair of miR-15b and miR-195 may contribute to the development of all the 38 different types of cancers via a similar regulation mechanism. More details of the discovered miRNA pairs and references are listed in Additional file 2.
        We were also interested in the problem of whether the co-functional phenomenon for the non-cancer disease related miRNAs is the same as those of cancers. Thus, we constructed a non-cancer disease related DGR tripartite network containing 1625 non-cancer disease-miRNA associations between 334 miRNAs and 174 diseases extracted from the three existing databases and also containing 1625 predicted associations (Additional file 1). There were just 13 multi-non-cancer-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs having a cfscore bigger than 0 and associating with no less than 10 different diseases. Again, we manually examined these candidate co-functional miRNA pairs. We found that 11 of them can be validated with strong evidence from literature (Additional file 2). Furthermore, 5 of the 13 pairs overlap with the cancer related top 50 miRNA pairs. This indicates that the co-functional mechanism exists not only for the cancer related miRNAs but also for non-cancer disease related miRNAs.
      
      
        An in-depth analysis of the 5 overlapping co-functional miRNA pairs
        To further understand the regulation mechanism of the co-functional miRNA pairs, we particularly focused on the common targets of the 5 overlapping co-functional pairs (Table 1). The first two columns list the two individual miRNAs in the co-functional miRNA pairs, the third column shows the ranks of those co-functional miRNA pairs. In the forth column, the number of diseases that may relate to the miRNA pairs are displayed, and the last column lists the co-functional targets of these miRNA pairs which are related to multiple diseases. Here, a target gene is ranked higher if it relates to more diseases. It can be seen that even though there are common co-functional miRNA pairs between cancers and non-cancer diseases, the co-functional targets of these miRNA pairs are different from each other. For example, for the two miRNA pairs that both are members of the miR-15 family (miR-15a/b), the top three possible co-functional targets for the non-cancer diseases are IFNG, MTHFR, RARB, while for cancers are BCL2, CDKN1A and CCND1. Meanwhile, there are a lot of genes repeatedly relate to various miRNA pairs such as the last three miRNA pairs from Table 1. Thus these miRNA pairs may function cooperatively and can form a co-functional module. This co-functional module is related to both of multi-cancers and multi-non-cancer diseases.
Table 1The co-functional miRNA pairs and their potential co-functional targets for both cancers and non-cancer diseasesCancer related co-functional miRNA pairsmiRNA1miRNA2RankCancer numbersCo-functional targetsmiR-15a-5pmiR-15b-5p837BCL2; CDKN1A; CCND1; VEGFA; MTHFR; IFNG; FGF2; FGFR4; SMAD7; CHEK1miR-17-5pmiR-20a-5p150TP53; CCND1; BCL2; CDKN1A; MDM2; VEGFA; MYC; HIF1A; CXCL8; SOD2miR-29a-3pmiR-29b-3p1927BCL2; MDM2; VEGFA; CASP8; MMP2; PTEN; AKT2; SPARC; VHL; DNMT3BmiR-29a-3pmiR-29c-3p1027BCL2; MDM2; VEGFA; CASP8; MMP2; PTEN; AKT2; SPARC; VHL; DNMT3BmiR-29b-3pmiR-29c-3p1329BCL2; MDM2; VEGFA; CASP8; MMP2; PTEN; VHL; AKT2; SPARC; CCNA2Non-cancer diseases related co-functional miRNA pairsmiRNA1miRNA2RankDisease numbersCo-functional targetsmiR-15a-5pmiR-15b-5p510IFNG; MTHFR; RARB; BCL2; CSNK1E; JARID2; PDCD1; ALDH3B1; APP; CDC25AmiR-17-5pmiR-20a-5p217CXCL8; SOD2; BCL2; ESR2; TP53; VEGFA; F3; ITGA2; PTGER4; CCL5miR-29a-3pmiR-29b-3p120MMP2; VEGFA; COL3A1; BCL2; FGB; CASP8; FGA; S100B; SPARC; TGFB3miR-29a-3pmiR-29c-3p413MMP2; COL3A1; VEGFA; AKT2; CASP8; FGB; MDM2; SGK1; TET2; BCL2miR-29b-3pmiR-29c-3p314MMP2; COL3A1; VEGFA; AKT2; CASP8; FGB; MDM2; MMP15; SGK1; MMP24

        To reveal the detailed regulation mode of these miRNAs associating with multiple cancers and non-cancer diseases, we conducted a deep case analysis. In Fig. 4, the top ten common target genes of each co-functional pair were combined to be a gene set. The DAVID functional annotation tool [37, 38] was applied to analyze these gene sets of the co-functional pairs in the module miR-29a-miR-29b-miR-29c, where the threshold of the pathway enrichment analysis [36] was set as p-value ≤0.05 (not the adjusted p-value, the following p-values are all not adjusted ones). The labels on the edges from the diseases to the genes are the probabilities of genes to be the co-functional targets of the miRNA co-function module. For example, the edge from the diseases to the gene VEGFA has the label of “C 77% N 23%”. This label means that the co-function module may dysregulate the gene VEGFA to contribute to the development of the 26 cancers (C) with the probability of 77%. This gene may also be the common target of the co-functional module during the dysregulation in the development of those 13 non-cancer disease (N) with the probability of 23%. The labels along with the edges connecting the genes and the pathways indicate that the genes from the target gene sets of the diseases (i.e., cancers (C) or non-cancer diseases (N)) associated co-function module can be mapped to the corresponding pathways. For instance, there are three edges connecting the genes with the pathway ‘hsa05219: Bladder cancer’ together with the labels of “C N VEGFA”, “C N MMP2” and “C MDM2”. The labels mean the genes VEGFA, MMP2 and MDM2 from the target gene set of the cancers (C) associated co-function module can be mapped to the Bladder cancer pathway. For the non-cancer diseases (N), only two genes (VEGFA and MMP2) can be mapped to this pathway. Those genes that cannot map to any pathways or those diseases that are not associated with all of the three co-functional pairs are ignored in the figure. The cancer related gene sets can be mapped to many different pathways, we just show the top ten pathways according to their p-values.
Fig. 4The miR-29a-miR-29b-miR-29c co-function module, their targets and the enrichment analysis of the KEGG pathways. The triangles are the potential common target genes of the miR-29a/b/c co-functional module. Those small squares are the genes enriched pathways. Those disease names in the big squares are the co-functional module related diseases according to our prioritization method

        It is uncovered that the co-functional module mainly dysregulates the ‘hsa05219: Bladder cancer’ and the ‘hsa05200: Pathways in cancer’ to contribute to the development of the 13 non-cancer diseases. The module also regulates eight other pathways (hsa05205, hsa04510, hsa04066, hsa04151, hsa04150, hsa04210, hsa05161 and hsa05215) to involve in the development of the 26 cancers. The cancer developments are more complex with more common genes involved. This observation is consistent with the hypothesis that similar diseases may be related to similar miRNAs and genes. The top three non-cancer disease genes regulated by the co-functional module and mapped to the pathways are MMP2, VEGFA and CASP8, while for the cancers are BCL2, MDM2 and VEGFA. With the gene ontology enrichment analysis, we found that the former three genes have the function of angiogenesis (GO:0001525, p-value=1.8E-4), macrophage differentiation (GO:0030225, p-value=2.1E-3), negative regulation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process (GO:0043154, p-value=9.0E-3) and response to hypoxia(GO:0001666, p-value=2.2E-2). The latter three genes can play roles of cellular response to hypoxia (GO:0071456, p-value=5.2E-5), response to iron ion (GO:0010039, p-value=2.4E-3), ovarian follicle development (GO:0001541, p-value=5.8E-3) and the other related functions. The co-functional module can regulate two same pathways during the development of both the cancers and non-cancer diseases. The possible common targets also have the similar function such as response to hypoxia. These indicate that the miR-29a/b/c regulation module may contribute to the disease development partly via similar dysregulation mechanism. On the other side, the co-functional module may prefer to function by dysregulating the same genes in the development of various cancers rather than those non-cancer diseases. During the carcinogenesis of 26 kinds of cancers, averagely more than 70% of those cancers relate to the dysfunction of the above three genes (BCL2, MDM2 and VEGFA). For the three non-cancer diseases related genes (MMP2, VEGFA and CASP8), the percentage is just around 30%. Those cancers related genes are more likely to involve in the same pathways which indicates the close relationships between their functions. This is mainly due to the fact that cancers are more similar to each other than those non-cancer diseases.
        Interestingly, there are a number of literature which have reported the co-function of the miR-29 family members in the development of the cancers such as non-small-cell lung cancer [39], renal cell carcinoma [40], breast cancer [41], ovarian cancer [42] and others types of cancers [43]. Furthermore, the MYC-mediated miR-29 repression mechanism for the therapy of aggressive B-cell malignancies (B-cell malignancies is the synonym of chronic lymphocytic leukemia according to Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) [44]) by applying the HDAC3 and EZH2 as therapeutic targets [45] was reported. Another report in 2015 also discussed the adoption of miR-29s (miR-29a/b/c) as candidate epi-therapeutics for curing hematologic malignancies [46]. According to our findings and literature, we can claim that it is reasonable to consider miR-29a/b/c as potential drug targets for the treatment of multiple cancers.
      
      
        The predicted miRNAs that are related to breast and prostate cancer: case studies
        In this section, we report details of the predicted miRNAs which are likely related to breast cancer and prostate cancer. Breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women, accounting for 25% of all women cancer patients [47]. Prostate cancer is the second most common type of cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men [47]. We have taken the following three steps for this case study: (1) the prediction model was trained on the RLSMDA data set of disease-miRNA associations [26] which contains 1184 disease-miRNA associations; (2) the prediction model was applied to make predictions for those disease-miRNA pairs whose relationships were unknown in this data set; (3) the positively predicted disease-miRNA pairs were evaluated using the latest version of databases such as miRCancer [33], miR2Disease [17] and HMDD [18], which stores newer disease-miRNA associations than the RLSMDA data set does. In fact, the RLSMDA data set stores only 78 and 34 miRNAs associated with breast cancer and prostate cancer respectively. However, the latest version of the three databases stores 227 and 152 miRNAs which have been found related to breast and prostate cancer. Thus, our predicted results can be fairly verified by the literature ground truth. As some of the predicted disease-miRNA associations were not covered by the three databases, we also searched other web sources to confirm the prediction results.
        We constructed 100 prediction models (for making reliable predictions), each time using all the 1184 disease-miRNA pairs as the positive samples and a set of randomly selected 1184 negative samples from the negative_expression data set (a data set of 4638 negative samples based on the analysis of expression data). If a unknown cancer-miRNA relationship is positively predicted by all the 100 models, then a strong association exists between the cancer and the miRNA. The association probabilities derived by the 100 models is averaged to indicate the strong association. Figure 5 shows the 30 top-ranked positively predicted miRNAs related to breast and prostate cancer in terms of the average probabilities of the 100 models for the miRNAs. The edges at the (a) part represent the breast cancer-miRNA associations while the edges at the (b) part show the prostate cancer-miRNA associations. The labels on these edges represent the ranking positions and evidence type of the prediction results. The characters “*”, “#” or “$” stand for that the corresponding associations can be confirmed by the records in the miR2Disease database, the HMDD database or the miRCancer database respectively. The character “@” means that the association can be confirmed by other articles. Otherwise, the predicted associations could not be confirmed to our best knowledge. Overall, 58 of the 60 predicted disease-miRNA relationships can be verified by the newer databases or by other literature work.
Fig. 5The top 30 predicted breast cancer-miRNA and prostate cancer-miRNA associations and the verification resources. The part a shows the predicted breast cancer related miRNAs and the part b gives the predict prostate cancer related miRNAs. The labels of the edges illustrate the rank of the predicted associations and the confirming types. The characters “*”, “#” or “$” stand for that the corresponding associations can be confirmed by the records in miR2Disease, HMDD or miRCancer respectively. The character “@” means that the association can be confirmed by other articles. A co-functional pair miR-195-5p-miR-15b-5p is highlighted

        Figure 6
a shows the percentages of the predicted disease-miRNA associations that can be verified when the number of top-ranked miRNAs varies from 10 to 150. The x-axis is the number of predictions (× 10) while the y-axis is the percentages of the verified predictions. For the first 10 to 50 predicted miRNAs associated with breast cancer or prostate cancer, 100 and 96% of them can be verified by the three newer databases or literature. The percentages drop to 98 and 88% when we assess on the first 100 predicted associations. This indicates that a more reliable predicted disease associated miRNAs can be ranked at a higher position by our method.
Fig. 6The percentages of the predicted disease-miRNA associations that can be verified. Panel a introduces the prediction performance of the model with the known cancer (breast and prostate cancer) related miRNAs. Panel b shows the prediction performance after the removal of the existing associations. The x-axis is the number of predictions (× 10) while the y-axis is the percentages of the verified predictions

        A novel association predicted by our method is about hsa-miR-15b (mapped as hsa-miR-15b-5p by miRBase) and breast cancer. Hsa-miR-15b is ranked as the 5th leading breast cancer related miRNA. This miRNA is an epidermal growth factor induced miRNA, and its association with breast cancer has not been recorded by any existing databases. However, a new discovery in 2015 can verify that there is an inverse correlation between the high expression of miRNA-15b and the low expression of its target gene MTSS1 in the tissues of breast cancer patients with the aggressive basal subtype [48]. The growth factor-inducible miRNAs can mediate the mechanisms underlying the progression of breast cancer. Another novel association predicted by our method is about hsa-miR-29c (mapped as hsa-miR-29c-3p by miRBase) and prostate cancer. This association is also ranked at the 5th position among the predicted prostate cancer related miRNAs, but it has not been recorded by any existing databases. A recent report claimed that miR-29c together with other five miRNAs such as miR-29a, miR-29b, miR-26a, miR-26b and miR-218 can control the expression of metastasis-promoting LOXL2 gene during the development of prostate cancer [49].
        For the association miR-20b-prostate cancer which cannot be verified, Moltzahn et al. [50] had reported an upregulation of miR-20b in prostate cancer patients comparing with the healthy samples. However, this upregulation was not statistically significant at the follow-up PCR experiments. With our prediction, there may be an association between miR-20b and prostate cancer.
        For some diseases, there have no currently known associations with any miRNAs. To test whether our prediction algorithm is still applicable for such situations, we conducted another experiment. In the experiment, we removed all the known miRNA associations with breast cancer or prostate cancer from the RLSMDA data set. The objective was to see whether our model can correctly predict these purposely removed and currently known breast cancer-miRNA or prostate cancer-miRNA associations. The prediction results are shown in Figure 6
b. Our model has a superior performance for predicting disease-miRNA associations even when there is no known association for these two cancers. Of the top 50 predicted disease-miRNA associations, all the predicted breast cancer-miRNA associations can be confirmed by the existing databases or literature, while 96% of the top 50 predicted prostate cancer-miRNA associations can be confirmed. The confirmation rates for the top-100 predicted associations can still maintain at a very high level. Moreover, the breast cancer-hsa-miR-15b-5p and the prostate cancer-hsa-miR-29c-3p can still be predicted and ranked highly. More details of the predicted and verified disease-miRNA pairs can be found in Additional file 2: Table S3–S6. The code in the Additional file 3 which implements our prediction algorithm has a default setting to output no more than 100 miRNAs for a given disease.
      
      
        Performance comparison: prediction of disease-miRNA relationships by different methods
        A number of methods have been proposed to make predictions of unknown disease-miRNA relationships. We compared the performance of our prediction method with three state-of-the-art methods: RLSMDA [26], the method proposed by Xu et al. [28], and Jiang’s method [29]. RLSMDA is a semi-supervised method that does not need any negative samples. Xu’s method is a supervised approach and it collects the negative samples according to tissue-specific and expression properties of the miRNAs. Jiang’s method is also a supervised method. It has utilized a set of 270 negative samples randomly selected from the un-connected disease-miRNA pairs of a miRNA-disease bipartite network.
        We first optimized our prediction model with two experiments such as selecting optimal precomputed kernel matrix and determining the best size of the negative samples comparing to positive ones during the training of our model. The results illustrate that our model can achieve best performance with the following settings: applying the squared root type of precomputed kernel matrix, setting the weight parameter α=0.8 and selecting the same size of negative samples as positive samples. In addition, we did the permutation test [29] which has proved that the performance of our prediction model was not produced occasionally but contains biological significance. The performances of our model with negative samples selected from our collected negative sample set or from all the un-connected pairs were compared. Selection of negative samples from our negative sample set has been proved to be a better choice. More detail of these procedures and the results can be found in the contents and Additional file 2: Figure S1–S3.
        The source codes of these above three literature methods were not available. We implemented the RLSMDA algorithm, but not the complicated Xu’s or Jiang’s method. It is not possible for us to compare various methods with a independent test set. For a fair comparison, their data sets and performance metrics (specificity, recall(or sensitivity), precision, accuracy and AUC) were exactly used by our method. More details of the implementation and data sets are described in Additional file 2, the positive samples are listed in Additional file 4.
        The specificity, recall, accuracy and AUC performances are benchmarked in Table 2 (those values of Xu’s method and Jiang’s method were obtained from their published papers). The ROC curve of our method is depicted in Fig. 7 in comparison with the curve of the RLSMDA method under the same data set and the same leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV). The ROC curves for the comparison of our methods with all the three methods are also showed in Additional file 2: Figure S4–S6. Our prediction model achieves much better AUC values than the three state-of-the-art methods. This is the main reason why our prediction method was used to predict unknown miRNA-disease associations and the top-ranked ones were added to reconstruct the disease-gene-miRNA tripartite networks. The superior performance of our prediction method is mainly attributed to the careful selection of reliable negative samples as well as the precomputed kernel matrix which can identify more positive samples.
Fig. 7The ROC curves of our model compared with RLSMDA based on the same positive samples. The comparison is based on the same positive sample set and the different prediction model of RLSMDA and our newly designed model. The average AUC value of our model is 0.9896 while the RLSMDA obtains the lower value of 0.9475
Table 2Performance comparison between our method and the three state-of-the-art prediction methodsMethodssample sizecv typeSpecificitySensitivityAccuracyAUCRLSMDA1184+LOOCV–––0.9475our model1184+,1184-LOOCV0.93670.93680.9367
0.9896
Xu’s method37+, 44-5-fold0.88330.86430.87720.9189our model37+, 37-5-fold
0.9990

1.000

0.9995

0.9854
Jiang’s method270+, 270-10-fold0.91250.73380.82320.8884our model263+, 263-10-fold
0.9274

0.8982

0.9128

0.9871
Symbols “+/-” represent “positive samples/negative samples”. cv means cross-validationThe best performance among the compared methods are showed in boldface

      
    
    
      Discussion
      A more challenging problem is to detect and prioritize multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA groups containing more than two members. An intuitive approach is to integrate all the co-functional pairs that overlap. As the co-function of more than two miRNAs is rarely reported by the literature, it is hard to validate the existence of multi-miRNA co-functional groups. The prioritization of multi-miRNA co-functional groups is one of our future research topics.
      As demonstrated, our method has a much better performance for the prediction of disease-gene associations. A key idea of our method is the use of reliable negative samples screened and obtained through the fold change information of miRNA expressions. An alternative approach to the screening can be through pairwise test statistics. Combining expression fold change and pairwise test statistics may lead to decreasing the false positives in the set of negative samples. In the future work, we will examine the trade-off between the performance improvement and the quadratic pairwise time complexity.
      Multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs are also linked to the concept of competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) [51, 52] which covers the regulation relationships of miRNAs and their targets including both mRNAs and long non-coding RNAs. Characteristics of miRNAs in the ceRNA networks can be considered to analyze the co-functions of miRNAs. For instance, if two miRNAs are involved in the same ceRNA network, they may always co-function with each other.
    
    
      Conclusion
      We have conducted a cross disease analysis of co-functional miRNA pairs on a reconstructed disease-gene-miRNA tripartite network. We made the following contributions: (1) We proposed a new idea for selecting reliable negative samples of disease-miRNA relationship which can overcome the problem of lacking negative samples for machine learning methods to make reliable predictions of disease-associated miRNAs; (2) Our prediction model does not need to do feature selection, and it is applicable for large scale prediction of disease-associated miRNAs; (3) Our prediction model can work well for those miRNAs that have no currently known miRNA-disease associations; (4) We designed a scoring function to prioritize the candidate multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs and their potential co-regulated genes; (5) We performed detailed case studies to understand the miRNA co-functional phenomenon for both cancers and non-cancer diseases; and (6) We performed deep case studies to reveal novel associations between miRNAs and breast cancer and those between miRNAs and prostate cancer. It can be concluded that our prediction method has a superior performance for the prediction of unknown miRNA-disease associations, and that the integration of the top-ranked ones into the existing database is useful and effective for the cross disease analysis of co-functional miRNA pairs.
    
    
      Methods
      Our method for the detection and prioritization of co-functional miRNA pairs and cross disease analysis includes three main computational steps: (i) Reconstructing the DGR tripartite network by combining the known relationships of diseases, miRNAs, and genes with those predicted disease-miRNA associations, (ii) Ranking the candidate co-functional miRNA pairs via a novel scoring method, (iii) Determining the potential co-functional target genes of these co-functional miRNA pairs. Details of these steps and data sets are described in the following subsections.
      
        Data sets for the diseases, miRNAs and their related genes
        Diseases and miRNAs stored at different databases may have different names or IDs. To deal with this inconsistency issue, we mapped the names of the diseases and miRNAs from all the relevant databases to the database Disease Ontology (DO) [53] and miRBase v21.0 [54]. The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) [44] and Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) [55] were used as the dictionaries of the disease names. We searched in DO for all the disease names of a data set. When exact terms were found in DO, the names and the DO ids were recorded and stored in a separate file. Otherwise, we searched in MeSH and CTD, and used their synonyms to map them to DO terms. To map the names of the miRNAs, we searched the given ids of the miRNAs in miRBase v21. When a term was not found, then it was discarded (according to miRBase, it may be a dead record because it is not a miRNA, or the record has been replaced by another one). A miRNA id is always related to two mature miRNA ids with the suffix of ‘-5p’ or ‘-3p’ which means a precursor miRNA will generate two mature miRNAs from the 5’-arm or the 3’-arm respectively. As the mature miRNAs are the real functional parts, the miRNAs from different resources were mapped to the mature miRNA ids in miRBase v21. For those older version ids, we also mapped them to the current mature miRNA ids according to the term of Previous IDs of the miRBase database. Finally, each miRNA was mapped to one mature miRNA id of the database miRBase v21.
        The genes were mapped to the entrez gene ids according to the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) [56]. To get the disease-related genes, we downloaded the supplementary files of [57] which contains 117,190 associations between 2817 diseases and 12063 genes from the database SIDD [58]. After data correction and redundancy removal, we obtained a data set of 114754 disease-gene associations between 2802 diseases and 10893 genes. To get the target genes of those miRNAs, we searched two databases: miRecords [19] and miRTarBase [20]. After mapping the miRNAs to miRBase v21 and mapping the gene names to entrez gene ids, we retrieved 322,269 miRNA-target pairs between 2588 miRNAs and 14794 genes. We list these disease genes and miRNA targets in Additional files 5 and 6 for more details.
      
      
        Positive samples and negative samples for training the prediction model to identify unknown disease-miRNA associations
        There are several disease-miRNA databases such as miR2Disease [17], HMDD [18], and miRCancer [33]. This work focuses on the human mature miRNAs. The database HMDD stores the miRNAs as the precursor miRNA ids, these ids were first converted into mature miRNA ids according to the provided reference links before mapping them to the mature miRNA ids. After mapping the miRNAs and diseases to miRBase v21 and DO respectively, we retrieved 4578 associations between 463 miRNAs and 263 diseases from HMDD, 1952 associations between 83 cancers and 341 miRNAs from miRCancer, and 2096 disease-miRNA associations between 108 diseases and 287 miRNAs from miR2Disease. These are known disease-miRNA associations and they are used as the positive samples for the training of the prediction model.
        Selection of negative samples, i.e., those disease-miRNA pairs that have little associations, is a difficult problem. We explored a novel idea to select credible negative samples. The new idea is to select negative samples according to the expression data of the miRNAs that we downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database [59]. We computed the fold changes of the miRNAs in the diseased patients comparing with the controls (i.e., the adjacent normal cells or the healthy contributor’s corresponding cells) according to the given platform information of the GEO database. A disease-related miRNA is always differentially expressed significantly between these two groups of subjects. Those miRNAs that are not significant differential expressed (the fold changes smaller than 0.05) will be regarded as non-disease related miRNAs. After conducting analysis on 78 GSE accessions (some accessions without enough information for compute the fold changes were removed), we determined 21432 disease-miRNA pairs between 2473 miRNAs and 73 diseases which have little association. The accession ids can be found in the Additional file 7. By comparing this data set of negative samples with the above HMDD-based, miRCancer-based and the miR2Disease-based positive data sets, those pairs that appeared in both of the negative data set and the positive data sets were discarded. We then obtained 4041, 1838 and 1487 disease-miRNA pairs respectively from HMDD,miRCancer and miR2Disease, which were regarded as positive samples. 20772 disease-miRNA pairs extracted by the analysis of the GSE accessions were used as negative samples. To obtain more reliable negative samples, we also removed those diseases that have no known related miRNAs and those miRNAs that have no known related diseases according to the three positive data sets from the 20772 disease-miRNA pairs. Finally, there are 4638 negative samples involving 53 diseases and 538 miRNAs. All these four data sets are further described in Additional file 8.
        We note that Jiang’s method [29] takes all those unknown disease-miRNA pairs as negative samples and constructed balanced data sets by a random selection of a subset of the negative samples as the same size of the verified disease-miRNA associations. Xu’s method [28] takes those miRNAs at the lowest expression levels in the normal tissue as negative samples. Our method for selecting negative samples is different and more convincing as we consider the fold changes of the expression levels of the miRNAs between diseased and control tissues.
      
      
        Precomputed kernel matrices for the support vector machine
        We applied support vector machine (SVM) to predict disease-related miRNAs. SVM is a supervised learning model for classification and regression [60]. We adopted the LibSVM version 3.20 [61] in this work. Usually, one can extract the features of the samples as the input of SVM to implement classification or regression with different kernel functions such as linear kernel, polynomial kernel, radial basis function kernel. However, even though we can represent a miRNA as a feature vector, it is hard to design an appropriate feature vector to describe a disease. Diseases are always phenotypes of patients. It is difficult to find the common properties of diseases that can be normalized as mathematical variables. To overcome this issue, we proposed to use precomputed kernel matrices instead of constructing the feature vectors to represent the disease-miRNA pairs. Construction of a precomputed kernel matrix has three main steps:
        
Step 1: Calculate the difference between two disease-miRNA pairs. Given two disease-miRNA pairs d
1
m
1 and d
2
m
2, we compute their difference (d
i
f
f(d
1
m
1,d
2
m
2)) in three ways: 
Average approach: 
1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \begin{aligned} diff\left(d_{1}m_{1},d_{2}m_{2} \right)=\left(DisSim\left(d_{1},d_{2} \right)+MiRSim\left(m_{1},m_{2} \right) \right)/2  \end{aligned}  $$ \end{document}diffd1m1,d2m2=DisSimd1,d2+MiRSimm1,m2/2
Squared root approach: 
2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \begin{aligned} diff\left(d_{1}m_{1},d_{2}m_{2} \right)=\sqrt{\left(DisSim\left(d_{1},d_{2} \right)\times MiRSim\left(m_{1},m_{2} \right) \right)}  \end{aligned}  $$ \end{document}diffd1m1,d2m2=DisSimd1,d2×MiRSimm1,m2
Centre distance approach: 
3\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \begin{aligned} {}diff\!\left(d_{1}m_{1},d_{2}m_{2} \right)\!=&[ \left(DisSim\!\left(d_{1},d_{2} \right)\,-\,AvgDisSim \right)^{2}+\\ &\left(MiRSim\left(m_{1},m_{2} \right)\,-\,AvgMiRSim \right)^{2} \!]^{1/2}  \end{aligned}  $$ \end{document}diffd1m1,d2m2=[DisSimd1,d2−AvgDisSim2+MiRSimm1,m2−AvgMiRSim2]1/2


        where DisSim and MiRSim represent the similarities between diseases and miRNAs respectively. AvgDisSim is the average similarity of all the disease-disease pairs, and AvgMiRSim is the average similarity of all the miRNA-miRNA pairs. Obviously, bigger values of d
i
f
f(d
1
m
1,d
2
m
2) means the two pairs d
1
m
1,d
2
m
2 are more similar. Details of computing the similarities between diseases or between miRNAs are introduced in the next section.
        
Step 2: Constructing the kernel matrix for training samples. For a training set of M samples {d
1
m
1,d
2
m
2,…,d
M
m
M} with class labels {l
1,l
2,…,l
M}, the training kernel matrix, denoted as TKM, is given by: 
4\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ TKM=\left(\begin{array}{ccc} k_{11} & \cdots & k_{1M}\\ \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\ k_{M1} & \cdots & k_{MM} \end{array}\right)   $$ \end{document}TKM=k11⋯k1M⋮⋱⋮kM1⋯kMM

        where, k
ij=diff(d
i
m
i,d
j
m
j) is the difference between the two pairs d
i
m
i and d
j
m
j.
        
Step 3: Constructing the kernel matrix for testing samples. For a testing set of n samples {D
1
M
1,D
2
M
2,…,D
n
M
n}, the kernel matrix for the testing samples, denoted by PKM, is given by: 
5\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ PKM=\left(\begin{array}{ccc} k^{\prime}_{11} & \cdots & k^{\prime}_{1M}\\ \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\ k^{\prime}_{n1} & \cdots & k^{\prime}_{nM} \end{array}\right)   $$ \end{document}PKM=k11′⋯k1M′⋮⋱⋮kn1′⋯knM′

        Using TKM and PKM as input to libSVM, the class labels of the n testing samples can be predicted, and the probabilities of the predictions can be derived at the same time.
      
      
        Measuring the pairwise similarities of diseases or miRNAs
        Disease similarity between two diseases, denoted by DisSim, is measured in two parts: the disease semantic similarity (SemSim) and the functional similarity between disease-related gene sets (FunSim). The multiplication of SemSim and FunSim is defined as DisSim. The definition of FunSim is referred to the SemFunSim method [57]. We implemented the algorithm and obtained the FunSim measurements between 2802 diseases. The SemSim was computed with the R package DOSE [62]. For the DOSE, we applied Resnik’s [63] definition of the common ancestor for two given terms. To avoid too many zero values of the similarities, we integrated SemSim and FunSim using a sum (instead of multiplication) and a weight parameter α. The new similarity measurement between disease d
i and disease d
j is computed by 
6\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \begin{aligned} DisSim\left(d_{i},d_{j} \right)=\alpha\times FunSim\left(d_{i},d_{j} \right)+\left(1-\alpha \right)\times SemSim\left(d_{i},d_{j} \right)  \end{aligned}  $$ \end{document}DisSimdi,dj=α×FunSimdi,dj+1−α×SemSimdi,dj

        MiRNA similarity between two miRNAs, denoted by MiRSim is also measured in two parts: the sequence similarity (SeqSim) and the function similarity (funSim). SeqSim evaluates the similarity of the two miRNA sequences. We applied the idea of pseudo amino acid composition [64] to represent a miRNA as a (4+λ)-dimension vector. This idea was originally proposed to represent protein sequences as vectors.
        Given a RNA sequence R:r
1,r
2,…r
i,…r
L, where r
i∈{A,G,C,U}. Then, R is represented as a vector V
R=[v
i]1×(4+λ), where the first four components stand for the occurrence frequencies of the 4 native nucleotides, and the latter λ components represent the sequence order effects of the nucleotides of R. The t-th (t<L) tier sequence order effect θ
t is calculated by 
7\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \theta_{t}=\frac{1}{L-t}\sum_{i=1}^{L-t}\Theta\left(r_{i},r_{i+t} \right)   $$ \end{document}θt=1L−t∑i=1L−tΘri,ri+t

        
8\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \Theta\left(r_{i},r_{i+t} \right)=\left(M_{i}-M_{i+t} \right)^{2}   $$ \end{document}Θri,ri+t=Mi−Mi+t2

        
9\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ M_{i}=\frac{M^{0}_{i}-\sum_{j=1}^{4}\frac{M^{0}_{j}}{4}}{\sqrt{\frac{\sum_{j=1}^{4}\left(M^{0}_{i}-\sum_{j=1}^{4}\frac{M^{0}_{j}}{4} \right)^{2}}{4}}}   $$ \end{document}Mi=Mi0−∑j=14Mj04∑j=14Mi0−∑j=14Mj0424

        where, M
i is the normalized ith (i=1, 2, 3, 4) molecular weight of the nucleotide. The original molecular weights (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\textit {M}^{0}_{\mathrm {i}}$\end{document}Mi0) of the four nucleotides are 135.1270 for A, 151.1261 for G, 111.1020 for C and 112.0868 for U. Then V
R=[v
1,v
2,…v
u,…,v
4+λ], 
10\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ v_{u}=\left\{\frac{f_{u}}{\sum_{i=1}^{4}f_{i}+w\sum_{j=1}^{\lambda}\theta_{j}},\left(1\leq u \leq 4 \right) \atop \frac{w\theta_{u-4}}{\sum_{i=1}^{4}f_{i}+w\sum_{j=1}^{\lambda}\theta_{j}},\left(5\leq u \leq 4+\lambda \right)\right.   $$ \end{document}vu=fu∑i=14fi+w∑j=1λθj,1≤u≤4wθu−4∑i=14fi+w∑j=1λθj,5≤u≤4+λ

        In this work, we set λ=5 and the weight factor w=0.05. f
u is the occurrence frequencies of the nucleotide u. Then, each of the miRNA sequence R is represented as a 9-dimension vector V
R=[v
i]1×9. Overall, the sequence similarity is given by 
11\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ SeqSim\left(R_{i},R_{j} \right)=1-\frac{SeqDis\left(V_{i},V_{j} \right)-min(SeqDis)}{max(SeqDis)-min(SeqDis)}   $$ \end{document}SeqSimRi,Rj=1−SeqDisVi,Vj−min(SeqDis)max(SeqDis)−min(SeqDis)

        
12\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ SeqDis\left(V_{i},V_{j} \right)=\left| V_{i}-V_{j} \right|   $$ \end{document}SeqDisVi,Vj=Vi−Vj

        where, |·| is the Euclidean distance, and min(SeqDis) and max(SeqDis) represent the maximum value and the minimum value of all the SeqSim values between different miRNAs.
        The funSim measurement is computed similarly as computing FunSim, namely a funSim between two miRNAs can be represented as the similarity between the two miRNA target sets. Similar to the measurement of DisSim, MiRSim of two miRNAs R
i and R
j is measured by integrating funSim and SeqSim with the same parameter α as follows: 
13\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ \begin{aligned} {}MiRSim\left(R_{i},R_{j} \right) &=\alpha\times funSim\left(R_{i},R_{j} \right)\\ &\quad+\left(1-\alpha \right)\times SeqSim\left(R_{i},R_{j} \right)  \end{aligned}  $$ \end{document}MiRSimRi,Rj=α×funSimRi,Rj+1−α×SeqSimRi,Rj

        Among all the datasets we mentioned previously, 551 different mature miRNAs were involved. Thus, we obtained the similarities between these 551 miRNAs in this work (details of the miRNAs and their targets listed in Additional file 6). Together with the similarities between 2802 diseases (details of the disease-gene associations listed in Additional file 5), these plenty of similarity information provide us adequate data to investigate associations between diseases and miRNAs.
      
      
        Scoring the multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pairs
        This work defines a multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pair as a pair of miRNAs that can dysregulate the same gene or whose target genes are involved in the same cellular processes to participate in the development of a series of diseases. Such a miRNA pair has three good properties: (i) the members function cooperatively, which means they prefer to share the same targets; (ii) the members are associated with the development of a same set of diseases; and (iii) the common miRNA targets of the two miRNAs are potentially to be the common disease genes of their related diseases. These three properties can be examined on a DGR tripartite network containing various associations between miRNAs, diseases and genes.
        Let d
g
r=(V
d∪V
g∪V
r,E) be a DGR tripartite network, where V
d is a set of diseases, V
g is a set of disease genes, V
r is a set of disease-related miRNAs, and E is the associations between these diseases, genes, and miRNAs. Given a pair of miRNAs R
1 and R
2,R
1,R
2∈V
r, we find the gene sets G
1={g
11,g
12,…,g
1k,…,g
1m} and G
2={g
21,g
22,…,g
2t,…,g
2n}, where g
1k,g
2t∈V
g and the edges (R
1,g
1k),(R
2,g
2t)∈E. We also find two subsets of diseases D
1={d
11,d
12,…,d
1p,…,d
1x} and D
2={d
21,d
22,…,d
2q,…,d
1y}, such that d
1p,d
2q∈V
d and the edges (R
1,d
1p),(R
2,d
2q)∈E. Then, for each disease d
l in D
1 and D
2, we can get its related genes \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\textit {d}^{{g}}_{{l}}=\left \{\textit {g}_{1},\textit {g}_{2},\dots, g_{l}, \dots, \textit {g}_{z}\right \}$\end{document}dlg=g1,g2,…,gl,…,gz.
        We quantify (i) the function relationship between a pair of miRNAs, (ii) miRNA regulation relationship in different diseases, and (iii) the relationship between the shared targets of two miRNAs and the common disease genes of these miRNAs associated diseases: 
MiRNA function relationship. A function relationship between R
1 and R
2 is quantified as the proportion of the shared targets (p
s
g(R
1,R
2)), namely, 
14\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ psg\left(R_{1},R_{2}\right)=\frac{G_{1}\cap G_{2}}{G_{1}\cup G_{2}}   $$ \end{document}psgR1,R2=G1∩G2G1∪G2
MiRNA regulation relationship in different diseases. The idea is that those miRNAs that have significant differential expression levels in different disease are more likely to function cooperatively. The co-dysexpression rate of R
1 and R
2,r
d(R
1,R
2), is defined with consideration of their shared diseases and the percentage of the shared diseases comparing with all the diseases in dgr (i.e., |V
d|): 
15\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ rd(R_{1},R_{2})=\frac{D_{1}\cap D_{2}}{D_{1}\cup D_{2}}\cdot \frac{D_{1}\cap D_{2}}{|V_{d}|}   $$ \end{document}rd(R1,R2)=D1∩D2D1∪D2·D1∩D2|Vd|
The relationship between the shared targets of R
1 and R
2 and the common disease genes of R
1 and R
2 shared diseases is defined as p
s
g
c(R
1,R
2). The idea is that those co-functional miRNAs always co-dysregulate the common disease genes to contribute to the disease development. 
16\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ psgc\left(R_{1},R_{2}\right)=\frac{\bigcup_{l=1}^{s}\left(\left(G_{1}\cap G_{2}\right)\cap d_{l}^{g}\right)}{G_{1}\cap G_{2}}   $$ \end{document}psgcR1,R2=⋃l=1sG1∩G2∩dlgG1∩G2


        where s is the number of diseases that the R1 and R2 shared.
        The score for weighting the probability of the pair R
1 and R
2 to be a multi-disease associated co-functional pair (cfScore) is defined as: 
17\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ cfScore\left(R_{1}, R_{2}\right) = psg\left(R_{1}, R_{2}\right) \cdot rd\left(R_{1}, R_{2}\right) \cdot psgc\left(R_{1}, R_{2}\right)  $$ \end{document}cfScoreR1,R2=psgR1,R2·rdR1,R2·psgcR1,R2

        MiRNA pairs related to bigger number of diseases are more likely to reflect the general regulation mechanism. Thus, a threshold is set to control the number of diseases that the pair is associated with. There is no reliable data set for us to select an optimal threshold, we just set the threshold to be 10. We can then rank all the candidate co-functional miRNA pairs according to their cfScores. A higher position indicates the pair is more likely to be a multi-disease associated co-functional miRNA pair.
        Usually, the two members of a co-functional miRNA pair can share more than one common targets. However, only part of them are really dysregulated by the miRNA pair during the development of the diseases (called the co-functional targets of this co-functional miRNA pair). As all those miRNAs shared targets can be candidate co-functional target, a probability is estimated for the candidate co-functional targets to be the exact dysregulated genes during the diseases’ developments. The idea is that the candidate co-functional targets being the disease genes for more of the miRNA pair associated diseases are more likely to be the real ones. We calculate the probability of gene g
i,p(g
i), to be a co-functional target by: 
18\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ p\left(g_{i}\right)=\frac{C_{g_{i}\cap\left(D_{1}\cap D_{2} \right)}}{C_{\left(D_{1}\cap D2 \right)}}   $$ \end{document}pgi=Cgi∩D1∩D2CD1∩D2

        where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\textit {C}_{\textit {D}_{1} \cap \textit {D}_{2}}$\end{document}CD1∩D2 is the number of common diseases associated with miRNA R
1 and R
2, while \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\textit {C}_{\textit {g}_{i}\cap \left (\textit {D}_{1}\cap \textit {D}_{2} \right)}$\end{document}Cgi∩D1∩D2 is the number of diseases associated with gene g
i.
      
    
    
      Additional files
      
        
Additional file 1The disease-miRNA associations for constructing the DGR tripartite. We list the disease-miRNA associations for constructing the DGR tripartite here including the cancer related tripartite and the non-cancer disease associated tripartite.This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 689 kb)

        
Additional file 2The supplementary results for our work. This file mainly introduces the supplementary results of our work such as the details of the supplementary files, the details of the model comparison, the case study results, our prioritized multi-disease associated co-function miRNA pairs, the supplementary codes and the related references.This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. • Figure S1. Performances of the predictions under different precomputed kernel matrix and alpha.• Figure S2. The ROC curves of the permutation test.• Figure S3. Performances of the prediction models with different size ratio of negative and positive samples.• Figure S4. The ROC curves of our model compared with RLSMDA based on the same positive samples.• Figure S5. The ROC curves of our model and Xu’s based on the same positive sample set and 5-fold cross validation.• Figure S6. The ROC curves of our method and Jiang’s method based on their positive sample set.(PDF 1260 kb)

        
Additional file 3Supplementary codes and data. The matlab codes of our methods and the input datasets. The data can also be downloaded from the following website: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSWDJHaWpnSUlPbGc. (ZIP 3080 kb)

        
Additional file 4Datasets for the comparison of different miRNA-disease association prediction models. This file contains the three datasets that used in three state-of-the-art methods such as RLSMDA, Xu’s method and Jiang’s method.This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 157 kb)

        
Additional file 5The disease-gene associations. The disease genes are listed in this file. These disease genes were obtained from the reference [56] and curated based on the DOID database and the HGNC database. This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 7220 kb)

        
Additional file 6The miRNA-target associations. The miRNA targets were downloaded from the two databased such as the miRecords an miRTarBase. The miRNA ids were mapped according to the miRBase v21, while the genes were mapped to HGNC database records. This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 5320 kb)

        
Additional file 7The GSE accessions for extracting negative samples. There are totally 78 GSE accessions that we downloaded from the GEO database. We analyzed these files to compute the fold changes of the miRNAs according to the given platform information.This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 28 kb)

        
Additional file 8Datasets for constructing the miRNA-disease association prediction models. Four datasets such as three positive sample sets “positive_miR”, “positive_HMDD” and “positive_miRcancer” and the negative sample set “negative_expression” are stored. The three positive sample sets are retrieved from the three existing databases such as miR2Disease, HMDD v2 and miRCancer, while the negative sample set was obtained via analyzing the expression of the miRNAs.This file can also be downloaded from: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6lH3mKdA9CSTkg2OVBPS0ZfVnM. (XLS 947 kb)

      
    
  
        Women diagnosed with breast cancer within 5 years of childbirth have poorer prognosis than nulliparous or pregnant women. Weaning-induced breast involution is implicated, as the collagen-rich, immunosuppressive microenvironment of the involuting mammary gland is tumor promotional in mice. To investigate the role of mammary fibroblasts, isolated mammary PDGFRα+ cells from nulliparous and postweaning mice were assessed for activation phenotype and protumorigenic function. Fibroblast activation during involution was evident by increased expression of fibrillar collagens, lysyl oxidase, Tgfb1, and Cxcl12 genes. The ability of mammary tumors to grow in an isogenic, orthotopic transplant model was increased when tumor cells were coinjected with involution-derived compared with nulliparous-derived mammary fibroblasts. Mammary tumors in the involution-fibroblast group had increased Ly6C+ monocytes at the tumor border, and decreased CD8+ T cell infiltration and tumor cell death. Ibuprofen treatment suppressed involution-fibroblast activation and tumor promotional capacity, concurrent with decreases in tumor Ly6C+ monocytes, and increases in intratumoral CD8+ T cell infiltration, granzyme levels, and tumor cell death. In total, our data identify a COX/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)–dependent activated mammary fibroblast within the involuting mammary gland that displays protumorigenic, immunosuppressive activity, identifying fibroblasts as potential targets for the prevention and treatment of postpartum breast cancer.
      
        
          Background
          The pathological mechanism of Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is still unclear. In the present study, pathway cross-talks were analyzed to identify hub pathways for BE, with the purpose of finding an efficient and cost-effective detection method to discover BE at its early stage and take steps to prevent its progression.
        
        
          Material/Methods
          We collected and preprocessed gene expression profile data, original pathway data, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) data. Then, we constructed a background pathway cross-talk network (BPCN) based on the original pathway data and PPI data, and a disease pathway cross-talk network (DPCN) based on the differential pathways between the PPI data and the BE and normal control. Finally, a comprehensive analysis was conducted on these 2 networks to identify hub pathway cross-talks for BE, so as to better understand the pathological mechanism of BE from the pathway level.
        
        
          Results
          A total of 12 411 genes, 300 pathways (6919 genes), and 787 896 PPI interactions (16 730 genes) were separately obtained from their own databases. Then, we constructed a BPCN with 300 nodes (42 293 interactions) and a DPCN with 296 nodes (15 073 interactions). We identified 4 hub pathways: AMP signaling pathway, cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and osteoclast differentiation. We found that these pathways might play important roles during the occurrence and development of BE.
        
        
          Conclusions
          We predicted that these pathways (such as AMP signaling pathway and cAMP signaling pathway) could be used as potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and therapy of BE.
        
      
    
      Background
      Barrett’s esophagus (BE, also known as columnar-lined esophagus), is a complication of gastroesophageal reflux disease and a precursor lesion in most cases of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) [1]. Although, less than 5% of patients with BE will go on to develop EA, it is generally accepted that most persons with BE are undiagnosed and the vast majority of EA occurs in patients with undiagnosed BE [2]. EA usually carries a poor prognosis, with a 5-year survival rate of less than 15% [3]. Endoscopic examination is the now most commonly used means for detection of early EA, but is neither feasible nor cost-effective [4]; therefore, there is great need for an efficient and cost-effective method to detect BE in the early stage to prevent progression.
      Recent efforts have been made to better understand the occurrence and development of BE. It has been reported that increasing age, cigarette smoking, obesity, lack of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection, and gastroesophageal reflux disease are the leading risk factors for BE [5]. In addition, the intestinal epithelial-associated caudal-type homeobox (CDX) transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2 have been implicated in the pathogenesis of BE [6]. By using next-generation sequencing in endoscopic biopsies, ARID1A has been identified as a tumor-suppressor gene in BE [7]. Furthermore, the genomic sequences have been discovered [8]. However, the exact pathological mechanism still remains unclear.
      At present, pathway analysis has become the first choice for extracting and explaining the underlying biology for high-throughput molecular measurements [9]. One effective biological approach to identifying pathway interaction is through genetic screenings, in which synthetic lethality of 2 mutations often indicates interaction between 2 pathways where those 2 mutations reside separately [10]. Given the complex nature of biological systems, pathways often need to function in a coordinated fashion to produce appropriate physiological responses to internal and external stimuli [11]. Fortunately, background pathway cross-talk network (BPCN) provides a quantifiable description of the molecular networks that characterize the complex interactions and the intricate interwoven relationships that govern cellular functions, among those tissues and disease-related genes to explain the molecular processes during disease development and progression [12]. In networks, 2 pathways are likely to interact with or influence each other (cross-talk) if significantly more protein interactions are detected between these 2 pathways than expected by chance. Therefore, in the present study, pathway cross-talk analysis was conducted based on the networks of BPCN and disease pathway cross-talk network (DPCN) to identify the key pathways for BE, so as to better understand the exact pathogenesis of BE.
      Therefore, we collected and preprocessed gene expression profile data, pathway data, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) data. Next, we separately constructed a BPCN and a DPCN. Finally, a comprehensive analysis was conducted on these 2 networks to identify key pathway cross-talks for BE. The results are potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and therapy of BE, which could give great insights to reveal the pathological mechanism underlying this disease, or contribute to future study of related diseases.
    
    
      Material and Methods
      
        Data recruitment and preprocessing
        
          Gene expression profile data
          The gene expression profile of BE, with accessing number of GSE39491 (8), was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). The data on GSE39491, on the A-AFFY-37 – Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2.0 platform, were composed of 40 BE samples and 80 controls from matched normal mucosa. The microarray data and annotation files were downloaded. Then, the gene expression profile on probe level was converted into gene symbol level, and the duplicated symbols were deleted. Finally, a total of 12 411 gene symbols was obtained for further analysis.
        
        
          Pathway data recruiting
          Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) is a knowledge base for systematic analysis of gene functions, linking genomic information with higher order functional information [13]. The KEGG pathway database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg) is a collection of graphical diagrams (pathway maps) for the biochemical pathways [14]. In this study, all human pathway data were downloaded from the KEGG pathway database, and a total of 300 pathways and 6919 genes were obtained.
        
        
          Protein interaction data recruitment and preprocessing
          There are several PPI databases that researchers commonly use, such as the Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND) [15], BioGRID [16], Reactome [17], and the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) [18]. In the present study, the global human PPIs were obtained from the STRING database (http://string-db.org/), which included a total of 1 048 576 interactions. The protein IDs were converted into gene symbol level, and the duplicated symbols were deleted. Finally, a PPI network including a total of 787 896 interactions (16 730 genes) were obtained for further analysis.
        
      
      
        BPCN construction
        To evaluate interactions among pathways, the PPI relationship between the pathways, which was pathway cross-talk, was investigated. The pathways that had cross-talk between each other were selected to construct the network, which was defined as the BPCN. First, for each of the pathway pairs that we obtained from the KEGG pathway database, the PPI analysis of the genes enriched in these 2 pathways were conducted. After statistically analyzing all of the pathway pairs and all of the interactions between any 2 pathway pairs, we separately denoted these numbers as weight values for the pathway pairs. Then, we used the Fisher exact test to evaluate gene overlap between any given pair of pathways [19], and P-values (denoted as PB) were adjusted by false discovery rate (FDR) [20]. Finally, the BPCN was visualized by Cytoscape with pathway pairs whose adjusted PB were <0.05.
      
      
        DPCN construction
        To further explore the relationships among the pathways in BE, a pathway cross-talk network was constructed based on the gene expression profile and the PPIs, and we denoted this network as the DPCN. In the present study, there were 2 steps for constructing the DPCN: pathway analysis for BE and DPCN construction.
        
          Pathway analysis for BE
          In the present study, to gain further insights into the functional enrichment of the genes of the BE, pathway analysis was performed on the gene expression profile. There were 2 steps in this analysis. First, pathway enrichment analysis was conducted based on the KEGG pathway database [13]. The Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [21] was used to perform the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of the nodes to find the biochemical pathways which might be involved in the occurrence and development of BE. The pathways with gene counts including more than 5 genes and less than 100 genes were selected for further analysis. Then, GSEA-ANOVA of the attract method was used to test pathway-level data to identify the values of the F-statistic, and the t test with Welch modification was used to adjust the P value [22]. In this case, each pathway was assigned a P value, which we denoted as PA, and these pathways were ranked in descending order according to their PA.
        
        
          DPCN construction
          In the present study, the DPCN was constructed based on the differential pathways. To further define the relationships of these pathways identified above, the PPI relationships between every pathway cross-talk were measured. For any pathway cross-talk, we went through all genes in a given pathway, and if a gene did not have any interaction, we skipped it. If a gene had interaction, the Spearman correlation coefficient (SCC) (23) was utilized to weight pairwise interactions of BE and normal controls in pathways. The SCC of a pair of interactions (x and y) was defined as:
          
            
              
                
                  S
                  C
                  C
                  (
                  x
                  ,
                  y
                  )
                  =
                  
                    1
                    
                      n
                      -
                      1
                    
                  
                  
                    ∑
                    
                      i
                      =
                      1
                    
                    n
                  
                  
                    (
                    
                      
                        g
                        (
                        x
                        ,
                        i
                        )
                        -
                        
                          g
                          ¯
                        
                        (
                        x
                        )
                      
                      
                        σ
                        (
                        x
                        )
                      
                    
                    )
                    ·
                    (
                    
                      
                        g
                        (
                        y
                        ,
                        i
                        )
                        -
                        
                          g
                          ¯
                        
                        (
                        y
                        )
                      
                      
                        σ
                        (
                        y
                        )
                      
                    
                    )
                  
                
              
            
          
          Where n was the number of interactions of the inter; g(x, i) or g(y, i) was the expression level of interaction a or b in the pathway i under a specific condition (BE or normal); ḡ(x) or ḡ(y) represented the mean expression level of interaction x or y and σ(x) or σ(y) represented the standard deviation of expression level of interaction x or y.
          For any pathway cross-talk, supposing that there were A and B genes in these 2 pathways, respectively, we defined the weight of the pathway pairs as the total absolute different value of SCC between normal controls and BE divided (X × Y).
          In the following, we used the Fisher exact test [19] to evaluate gene overlap between any given pathway cross-talk, and P-values, which we denoted as PD, were adjusted by FDR [20]. Finally, the pathway pairs of BE and normal controls whose adjusted PD <0.05 were considered as differential pathways were selected to construct a DPCN via Cytoscape.
        
      
      
        Identification of hub pathways
        For purposes of identifying hub pathways for BE, a general analysis was conducted on the BPCN and DPCN. Centrality analysis was employed to investigate biological functions and significance of hub cross-talks in BPCN and DPCN. Centrality measures mainly contain degree [24], closeness [25], betweenness [26], and transitivity [27], in which degree is the simplest topological index. In the present study, the pathways of the BPCN and DPCN were ranked in descending order according to the degree centralities of the pathways.
        Then, the rank product (RP) algorithm [28], a simple but powerful meta-analysis tool to detect differentially expressed genes between 2 experimental conditions, was used to analyze these 2 networks. U and V stand for 2 conditions (BE vs. controls), and there were nU and nV replicates in the BPCN, and mU and mV in DPCN. The RP for each cross-talk was determined according to the following formula:
        
          
            
              
                R
                
                  
                    P
                  
                  s
                
                =
                
                  
                    
                      (
                      
                        ∏
                        i
                      
                      
                        
                          
                            r
                          
                          
                            s
                            i
                          
                        
                      
                      )
                    
                  
                  
                    1
                    /
                    T
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        Where:
        
          
            T=(nu×nv)+(mu×mv)
          
        
        Where rsi stood for the rank of sth gene under ith comparison, i=1, …, T. The pathways with RP value <0.05 were considered to be very important and selected for further analysis.
        The impact factor (IF) was considered to determine the hub pathways. For an arbitrary pathway x, where PD represented the degree value of the DPCN, and PA represented the P value according to the attract method. The IF of pathway x was calculated according to the following formula:
        
          
            
              
                I
                
                  
                    F
                  
                  x
                
                =
                
                  
                    
                      
                        P
                      
                      
                        D
                        x
                      
                    
                  
                  
                    1
                    -
                    
                      
                        P
                      
                      
                        A
                        x
                      
                    
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        Finally, based on comprehensive analysis, the pathways with PA <0.05 and RP value <0.05, as well as the top 2% pathways according to the IF values, were considered as hub pathways. The cross-talks among hub pathways were hub cross-talks.
      
    
    
      Results
      In the present study, for detecting significant biomarkers for BE, pathway cross-talk analysis was conducted. Prior to analysis, gene data, original pathway data, and PPI data were all collected from their own databases. In the following, comprehensive analysis was performed on the BPCN and DPCN to identify hub cross-talks. The results were as follow.
      
        BPCN construction
        Having obtained the pathway data and the PPI data from their own databases, the PPI relationships between any 2 pathways were analyzed. By setting the threshold value of PB <0.05, a BPCN with 300 nodes (42 293 interactions) was constructed (Figure 1). Degree centrality analysis was conducted on the BPCN (Figure 2), showing that the degree of most pathways was focused on the value between 250 and 300. In this case, most pathways were contacted with each other. Edges between 2 pathways with significant gene overlap were considered as not informative, and thus were removed from the network. Note that it was our intent to discover cross-talk among different biological activities in BE; therefore, we constructed a DPCN.
      
      
        DPCN construction
        
          Pathway enrichment analysis
          As indicated in the Methods section, to construct the DPCN, we first conducted KEGG enrichment analysis of the gene expression profile of BE. Then, each pathway was assigned a P value via the attract method. There were 16 pathways with PA <0.05: Chemical carcinogenesis (PA=6.49E-06), Metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome (PA=2.09E-05), Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction (PA=7.97E-05), Ribosome (PA=7.97E-05), Retinol metabolism (PA=7.97E-05), Drug metabolism – cytochrome (PA=1.30E-03), Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity (PA=1.71E-03), RNA transport (PA=1.71E-03), ABC transporters (PA=4.79E-03), Osteoclast differentiation (PA=1.20E-02), Nicotine addiction (PA=1.20E-02), Antigen processing and presentation (PA=1.90E-02), cAMP signaling pathway (PA=2.40E-02), cGMP – PKG signaling pathway (PA=2.40E-02), Valine (PA=2.40E-02), and Spliceosome (PA=2.40E-02).
        
        
          DPCN construction
          To further define the biological activities of the pathways of the BE, a DPCN was constructed based on the differential pathways. As SCC was used to weight the pairwise interactions of BE and normal controls in pathways, the Fisher exact test was utilized to evaluate gene overlap between any given pathway cross-talk, and FDR was used to adjust the P value. By setting the cutoff value of PD <0.05, 296 differential pathways were identified. In this case, a DPCN with 296 nodes (15 073 interactions), where each node represented a pathway, was built (Figure 3). Then, degree centrality analysis was conducted on the DPCN (Figure 4), showing that the degree values were scattered and distributed dispersedly from 0 to 200, which was smaller than that in BPCN. This might be useful in exploring different cross-talks between BE and normal controls.
        
      
      
        Identification of hub pathways
        To detect differentially expressed genes between BE and the normal control condition, an RP algorithm was implemented to perform analysis on these 2 networks. Under the threshold value of RP <0.05, we obtained a total of 55 pathways. The IF values of the pathways were calculated and ranked in descending order, and we obtained 6 pathways: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (IF=186), Osteoclast differentiation (IF=157), cAMP signaling pathway (IF=156), Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity (IF=147), cGMP - PKG signaling pathway (IF=137), and Epstein-Barr virus infection (IF=135). Finally, 4 hub pathways – cAMP signaling pathway, cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and Osteoclast differentiation – were identified under the threshold values of PA <0.05 and RP value <0.05, as well as the top 2% pathways according to the IF values. The details are listed in Table 1, and these 4 hub pathways were regarded to play key roles in BE. The hub cross-talks are shown in Figure 5.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      BE is an acquired condition in which the normal stratified squamous epithelium in the distal esophagus is replaced by metaplastic columnar epithelium in response to chronic gastroesophageal reflux [29], with a predisposition to EA. Better understanding of the molecular alterations during its development might improve prevention and tumor control and ultimately lead to better disease management. High-throughput biological experiments that interrogate many genes simultaneously have generated unprecedented amounts of data. Bioinformatics methods have been accepted as quick and efficient methods for analyzing these huge amounts of data, providing a preliminary understanding of the disease. Pathway analysis has become the first choice for gaining insight into the underlying biology of genes and proteins, as it reduces complexity and has increased explanatory power [30]. Traditional methods often pay close attention to diagnostic or prognostic markers, usually obtained by identification of the most significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the case-control and the disease [31], then pathway analysis is conducted on the DEGs to disclose the significant differential pathways between the disease and the normal control conditions. However, studies showed that the most significant DEGs obtained from different studies for a particular disease are typically inconsistent [32]. The cross-validation of datasets, such as network-based methods, significantly reduce those false findings and increase sensitivity [33]. Moreover, by utilizing pathway-related networks, one can gain insights into the mechanism by which biological systems operate [34].
      Therefore, in this research, we conducted analysis on BE via integrating biological pathways and protein interaction data. We found that pathways of cAMP signaling pathway, cGMP – PKG signaling pathway, Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and Osteoclast differentiation showed significant differences between BE condition and normal control condition. Therefore, to further define the relationship between the altered pathways and BE, we conducted an in-depth analysis of the altered pathways, and cAMP signaling pathway used as an example.
      Pathway analysis has been conducted to disclose the molecular mechanisms underlying BE [35–37]. It has been reported that a brief exposure to acid induces MAPK activation in vitro in human Barrett’s-associated esophageal adenocarcinoma cells and in vivo in the metaplastic esophageal mucosa of patients with BE [35]. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) has tissue- specific effects on growth, differentiation, and gene expression [38]. cAMP has been found to activate MAPK and Elk-1 through a B-Raf- and Rap1-dependent pathway [39]. Furthermore, it has been reported that there is significant cross-talk between cAMP and MAPK signaling in the regulation of cell proliferation. In the present study, the cAMP signaling pathway was considered to be significant for EB. Therefore, we predict that there might be a relationship between cAMP signaling pathway and BE. In the future, further experimental verification should be conducted to verify the relationship between the cAMP signaling pathway and BE.
    
    
      Conclusions
      We identified several hub pathways (cAMP signaling pathway, cGMP – PKG signaling pathway, Natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and Osteoclast differentiation) for BE via integrating biological pathways and protein interaction data. We predict that these pathways might play key roles during the occurrence and development of BE, and are potentially novel predictive and prognostic markers for BE.
    
  
        Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been implicated in multiple malignant tumors, and HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) exert anti-cancer effects. However, the expression of HDACs and the anti-tumor mechanism of HDACIs in cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) have not yet been elucidated. In this study, we found that expression of HDACs 2, 3, and 8 were up-regulated in CCA tissues and those patients with high expression of HDAC2 and/or HDAC3 had a worse prognosis. In CCA cells, two HDACIs, trichostatin (TSA) and vorinostat (SAHA), suppressed proliferation and induced apoptosis and G2/M cycle arrest. Microarray analysis revealed that TACC3 mRNA was down-regulated in CCA cells treated with TSA. TACC3 was highly expressed in CCA tissues and predicted a poor prognosis in CCA patients. TACC3 knockdown induced G2/M cycle arrest and suppressed the invasion, metastasis, and proliferation of CCA cells, both in vitro and in vivo. TACC3 overexpression reversed the effects of its knockdown. These findings suggest TACC3 may be a useful prognostic biomarker for CCA and is a potential therapeutic target for HDACIs.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) originates from the epithelial cells of the intra- and extra-hepatic biliary trees and is the second most common hepatobiliary malignancy after hepatocellular carcinoma [1]. Morbidity due to CCA has been rising worldwide over the past several decades [2]. Due to the strong and early invasive characteristics of CCA, most patients are diagnosed in the later stages of disease. In addition, more than two-thirds of patients are ineligible for surgery, the only potential curative option. Unfortunately, even radical resection is associated with a high rate of recurrence that results in a five-year survival rate of less than 20-40%. Most CCA patients resort to palliative treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy, with a response of only 10-20% [3–5]. Therefore, it is crucial to find new therapeutic strategies and an effective prognostic biomarker for patients with CCA.
      Tumor development requires both genetic and epigenetic alterations, which include DNA methylation, histone modifications, and gene silencing by small RNAs [6]. Acetylation of the N-terminal tail of core histones is tightly controlled by the antagonistic actions of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) [7]. HDACs remove acetyl groups from the lysine residues of histones, increasing the ionic interactions between DNA and histones, and resulting in chromatin condensation that represses transcription [8, 9]. As a consequence, excessive deacetylation of histones induces cell proliferation, angiogenesis, cell migration, and invasion by inactivating tumor suppressor genes [10]. There are eighteen HDAC isoforms categorized into four classes. Class I HDACs (HDACs 1, 2, 3 and 8) are the best characterized and are related to the yeast RPD3 deacetylase. Class II HDACs are subdivided into class IIa (HDACs 4, 5, 7 and 9) and class IIb HDACs (HDACs 6 and 10), which are homologous to the yeast Hda1 deacetylase. Class III HDACs (sirtuins [SIRTs]) include the seven subtypes of SIRTs (SIRTs 1-7), while class IV HDACs only includes HDAC11 [11–13]. Many studies have reported on the differential expression of class I and II HDAC isoforms in a variety of malignancies and cell lines, such as lymphoma [14], breast [15], gastric [16], colorectal [17], and lung cancers [18], hepatocellular carcinoma [19], as well as cholangiocarcinoma [20]. Despite the fact that class I and II HDACs are overexpressed in a variety of CCA cell lines, few studies have examined HDAC expression status and its prognostic value in CCA patients [20].
      A multitude of natural and synthetic compounds function as HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) that weaken histone-DNA interactions permitting a more open chromatin conformation and enhancing gene transcription. HDACIs as cancer treatments lead to increased transcription of tumor suppressor genes, the induction of cell cycle arrest, differentiation, and apoptosis, and the inhibition of angiogenesis [21, 22]. HDACIs have been classified into four groups according to their chemistry: hydroxamates (trichostatin [TSA] and vorinostat [SAHA]), cyclic peptides (romidepsin), aliphatic acids, and benzamides [21, 23]. Out of all of the HDACIs, SAHA has shown the most promising antitumor effects on tumor types at doses that are well-tolerated by patients and was the first HDACI approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma [24]. TSA is a pan-HDACI and was the first natural hydroxamate found to inhibit cell proliferation and induce apoptosis in many cancer cell lines, such as breast cancer, lung cancer, and CCA cells [20, 21, 25]. Despite the broad application of HDACIs in cell culture, animal models, and early phase clinical trials, surprisingly little is known about specific anti-tumor mechanism of HDACIs in CCA.
      Transforming acidic coiled-coil-containing protein 3 (TACC3), a member of the TACC family, is encoded by the TACC3 gene, which is located on 4p16.3. TACC3 is a centrosome/microtubule-associated protein characterized by a highly conserved C-terminal coiled-coil domain [26, 27]. TACC3 regulates centrosome integrity and microtubule dynamics during mitosis, and has recently been shown to modulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through the activation of the PI3K/Akt and ERK signaling pathways in cervical cancer cells [28, 29]. TACC3 is also involved in the development of glioblastoma [30], multiple myeloma [31], lung cancer [32] and breast cancer [33], while TACC3 expression is decreased in thyroid and ovarian cancers [34, 35]. The function of TACC3 and its relationship with HDACIs in CCA is unknown.
      In the present study, we first investigated the expression of class I and II HDACs in CCA tissues, and then, assessed the correlation of HDAC expression with CCA patient clinicopathological characteristics. We then demonstrated that TSA and SAHA inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in CCA cell lines. In addition, through a microarray experiment, we found that TACC3 expression was down-regulated when cells were treated with HDACIs. Expression of TACC3 and its correlation with the clinicopathological features of CCA were also investigated. Moreover, the functions of TACC3 were assessed by RNA knockdown and rescue experiments, in vitro and in vivo. Our findings suggest that HDAC2, HDAC3, and TACC3 are highly expressed in CCA tissues and that their expression correlates with poor prognosis in CCA patients. Thus, TACC3 may be a target of HDACIs, which inhibit the proliferation and migration of CCA cells.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        High expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 promotes tumor progression and correlates with poor prognosis
        The expression of class I and class II HDAC mRNAs was assayed with qRT-PCR in 26 paired CCA and adjacent non-tumor fresh tissue samples. Among HDACs 1-10, class I HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8) and HDAC9 were more highly expressed in CCA tissues compared with paired non-tumor tissues (P<0.05; Figure 1A). HDAC protein expression was then assayed by Western blot (WB), and the expression of HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8 were higher in CCA tissues compared with paired non-tumor tissues (P<0.05; Figure 1B). We selected HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8 to further examine in 79 paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded paired CCA and adjacent non-tumor tissues with immunohistochemistry (IHC). Expression of all three HDACs was localized to the nucleus (Figure 1C), and high expression of HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC8 was observed in 42 (53.16%), 44 (55.69%), and 42 (53.16%) CCA cases, respectively. CCA tissues had higher expression compared with corresponding matched non-tumor tissues (27.85%, 30.38%, and 32.91% for HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC8, respectively; χ2 =10.505, 10.327, 6.609; P<0.05; Table 1). Furthermore, high expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 was positively correlated with lymph node metastasis (χ2 =15.474; 9.757) (P<0.001, P=0.002), TNM stage (χ2 =13.021; 7.693) (P<0.001, P=0.006), and differentiation (χ2 =9.125; 8.313) (P=0.003; P=0.004) in CCA; however, no such correlations were observed for HDAC8 (P>0.05; Table 1). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that patients with low expression of HDAC2 and/or HDAC3 exhibited a longer overall survival (OS) than those with high expression of HDAC2 and/or HDAC3 (P<0.001, Figure 1D), but no correlation with OS was observed for HDAC8. Moreover, multivariate COX regression analyses identified HDAC2 and HDAC3 as significant, independent prognostic factors for OS (95%CI: 1.393-9.857, P=0.009; 95%CI: 2.419-12.575, P<0.001; Table 2), as well as for lymph node status (95%CI: 1.078-6.320, P=0.034), TNM stage (95%CI: 2.335-10.182, P=0.002), and differentiation (95%CI: 1.950-8.758, P<0.001; Table 2).
        
          Figure 1
          
            Expression of HDACs in patients with CCA and the correlation of the HDAC2/3 expression with poor prognosis
            A. qRT-PCR was used to measure the expression of class I and class II HDACs in 26 paired CCA and non-tumor tissue samples. Total RNA was isolated from at least three samples of each tissue and ACTB was used as the internal control. Fold changes were calculated through relative quantification (2−ΔΔCt). Data are shown as mean ± SD, *P<0.05. B. Western blot was used to detect protein expression of HDACs 2, 3, and 8. GAPDH was used as the internal control and all experiments were repeated three times. A representative image is shown (upper panel), and the statistical analysis of the relative optical density of each band is shown (lower panel). *P<0.05. C. Representative IHC staining of HDACs 2, 3 and 8 in CCA tissues and paired adjacent non-tumor tissue (400X). Scale bar, 100μm. D. Kaplan-Meier analysis. a. Patients with low HDAC2 expression (n=37) had longer overall survival (OS) than patients with high HDAC2 expression (n=42; median OS: 40 months vs 16 months, P<0.001, log-rank test). b. Patients with low HDAC3 expression (n=35) had longer OS than patients with high HDAC3 expression (n=44; median OS: 43 months vs 17 months, P<0.001, log-rank test). c. There were no differences in OS between the low HDAC8 expression group (n=37) and the high HDAC8 expression group (n=42; median OS: 32 months vs 26 months, P=0.5893, log-rank test). d. Patients with lower expression of both HDAC2 and HDAC3 (n=21) had a longer OS than patients with higher expression of both HDAC2 and HDAC3 (n=22), or low expression of either HDAC2 or HDAC3 (n=36; median OS: 42 months vs 16 months vs 25 months, P<0.001, log-rank test).
          
          
        
        
          Table 1
          
            Expression of HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, and TACC3 in 79 CCA patients
          
          
            
              
                Group
                N
                HDAC2
                
                  P
                
                HDAC3
                
                  P
                
                HDAC8
                
                  P
                
                TACC3
                
                  P
                
              
              
                Low
                High
                Low
                High
                Low
                High
                Low
                High
              
            
            
              
                
                  Age
                
              
              
                
                   ≤ 60
                
                45
                27
                18
                0.329
                25
                20
                0.396
                17
                28
                0.052
                22
                23
                0.259
              
              
                
                   > 60
                
                34
                19
                15
                17
                17
                20
                14
                20
                14
              
              
                
                  Gender
                
              
              
                
                   male
                
                45
                25
                20
                0.476
                27
                18
                0.345
                19
                26
                0.165
                23
                22
                0.238
              
              
                
                   female
                
                34
                20
                14
                18
                16
                19
                15
                21
                13
              
              
                
                  CCA/non-tumor tissues
                
              
              
                
                   CCA
                
                79
                37
                42
                0.001
                35
                44
                0.001
                37
                42
                0.01
                34
                45
                0.008
              
              
                
                   non-tumor
                
                79
                57
                22
                55
                24
                53
                26
                50
                29
              
              
                
                  Lymphoid nodal status
                
              
              
                
                   No
                
                48
                31
                17
                <0.001
                28
                20
                0.002
                25
                23
                0.245
                27
                21
                0.003
              
              
                
                   Yes
                
                31
                6
                25
                7
                24
                12
                19
                7
                24
              
              
                
                  TNM staging
                
              
              
                
                   I-II
                
                45
                29
                16
                <0.001
                26
                19
                0.006
                25
                20
                0.074
                27
                18
                <0.001
              
              
                
                   III-
                  IV
                
                34
                8
                26
                9
                25
                12
                22
                7
                27
              
              
                
                  Differentiation
                
              
              
                
                   Well
                
                27
                19
                8
                0.003
                18
                9
                0.004
                16
                11
                0.111
                19
                8
                <0.001
              
              
                
                   Medium/Poorly
                
                52
                18
                34
                17
                35
                21
                31
                15
                37
              
            
          
          
            p values were calculated by Pearson's Chi-square test.
          
        
        
          Table 2
          
            Univariate and multivariate analyses for predictors of overall survival (OS)
          
          
            
              
                Variables
                OS
              
              
                Univariate analysis
                Multivariate analysis
              
              
                p value
                95% CI
                p value
              
            
            
              
                Age (>60years vs ≤60years)
                0.141
                
                
              
              
                Gender (male vs female)
                0.234
                
                
              
              
                Lymphoid nodal status (no vs yes)
                <0.001
                1.078-6.320
                0.034
              
              
                TNM stage (I-II vs III-IV)
                <0.001
                2.335-10.182
                0.002
              
              
                Differentiation (well vs medium/poorly)
                <0.001
                1.950-8.758
                <0.001
              
              
                HDAC2 expression (low vs high)
                <0.001
                1.393-9.857
                0.009
              
              
                HDAC3 expression (low vs high)
                <0.001
                2.419-12.575
                <0.001
              
              
                HDAC8 expression (low vs high)
                0.5893
                
                
              
              
                TACC3 expression (low vs high)
                0.0008
                1.503–3.1670
                0.0063
              
            
          
          
            Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval.
          
        
      
      
        TSA and SAHA suppress cell proliferation, promote cell apoptosis, induce cell cycle arrest, and restrain EMT in CCA cell lines
        To investigate the anti-cancer effects of HDACIs in CCA, TSA and SAHA were used to treat the two CCA cell lines, TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 (1% DMSO treatment was used as a negative control). Both TSA and SAHA suppressed cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in CCA cells (Figure 2A). At 48 hours, the IC50 of TSA was 0.3075 μM for TFK-1 cells and 0.4718 μM for HuCCT-1 cells, while the IC50 of SAHA was 3.257 μM for TFK-1 cells and 4.603 μM for HuCCT-1 cells. Moreover, when TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells were treated with TSA and SAHA at their respective IC50 doses for 48 hours, the rate of apoptosis was higher than that of the DMSO-treated cells (P<0.05, Figure 2B). Additionally, both drugs induced G2/M cell cycle arrest in both CCA cell lines (P<0.05, Figure 2C), and the percentage of TFK-1 cells in G1 phase was also markedly decreased (P<0.05, Figure 2C). For HuCCT-1 cells, a decrease in the percentage of cells in G1 phase was only observed after treatment with TSA (P<0.05, Figure 2C). Consistent with these results, expression of the well-defined apoptosis protein marker, cleaved caspase 3, was markedly increased (P<0.05, Figure 2D), while expression of G2/M phase checkpoint proteins, including CDK1 and cyclin B1, was down-regulated after treatment with TSA or SAHA (P<0.05, Figure 2D). To detect the impact of HDACIs on EMT, we also examined the expression of the epithelial marker, E-cadherin, and the mesenchymal marker, vimentin. Elevated expression of E-cadherin and reduced expression of vimentin were detected at both the mRNA and protein level after TSA and SAHA treatment. In addition, the expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 were down-regulated (P<0.05, Figure 2E). These results indicated that HDAC2 and HDAC3 might restrain EMT in CCA cells.
        
          Figure 2
          
            TSA and SAHA suppress cell proliferation, promote cell apoptosis, induce cell cycle arrest, and restrain EMT in CCA cell lines
            For all experiments, TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations (IC50 values at 48 hours) of TSA (left panels) or SAHA (right panels). 1% DMSO treatment was used as a negative control and each experiment was repeated three times. Data are presented as means ± SD. A. The survival rates of TFK-1 (upper panel) and HuCCT-1 (lower panel) cells were detected by CCK-8 assay. Survival Rate % = (ODtreated − ODblank)/(ODcontrol − ODblank) × 100%. B. Apoptotic cells were analyzed by FACS via staining of annexin V. The percentage of apoptotic cells is shown (TFK-1, upper panels; HuCCT-1, lower panels; * P<0.05). C. An increased number of cells in G2/M phase was found by FACS analysis after treatment with TSA or SAHA. The percentage of TFK-1 cells in G1 phase was also markedly decreased. A decrease in the percentage of HuCCT-1 cells in G1 phase only observed after treatment with TSA (TFK-1, upper panels; HuCCT-1, lower panels; *P<0.05). D. Western blot demonstrated that the expression of the caspase 3 was increased, while the expression of the G2/M phase checkpoint proteins, CDK1 and cyclin B1, was down-regulated in TFK-1 (upper panels) and HuCCT-1 (lower panels) cells after treatment with TSA or SAHA. β-actin was used as the internal control. *P<0.05. E. qRT-PCR was used to analyze the mRNA expression of HDAC2, HDAC3, CDH1, and VIM in TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cell lines after treatment with TSA or SAHA, ACTB was used as the internal control (Left panels, *P<0.05). Western blot was used to explore protein expression of HDAC2, HDAC3, E-cadherin, and vimentin in TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cell lines after treatment with TSA or SAHA. β-actin was used as the internal control (Left panels, *P<0.05). Representative images are shown (middle panels). Statistical analysis of the relative optical density of each band is shown (right panels, *P<0.05).
          
          
        
      
      
        Identification of TACC3 as a molecular drug target of HDAC inhibitors and its correlation with poor prognosis in CCA patients
        To identify the target transcripts of HDACIs, mRNA expression profiles of TFK-1 cells treated with TSA at the IC50 dose for 48 hours, were measured via microarray analysis. TFK-1 cells treated with 1% DMSO were used as a negative controls. The microarray data have been stored in the NCBI GEO repository and are accessible through the following GEO accession number: GSE78867 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE78867). In total, there were 1568 up-regulated genes and 1448 down-regulated genes identified. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) software was used to identify genes involved in cell proliferation and migration, leaving 163 genes as shown in the hierarchical clustering graph (Figure 3A). Among these genes, TACC3 mRNA was markedly down-regulated (Fold Change=6.317668; P<0.0001) after TSA treatment. To validate these findings, TACC3 mRNA expression was analyzed by qRT-PCR in CCA cell lines treated with TSA or SAHA. The qRT-PCR results confirmed that TACC3 mRNA was down-regulated after treatment with HDACIs (P<0.05; Figure 3B).
        
          Figure 3
          
            Microarray analysis indicates TACC3 as a molecular drug target of HDAC inhibitors, and the expression of TACC3 correlates with the prognosis of CCA patients
            A. Hierarchical clustering analysis of 163 mRNAs involved in cell proliferation and migration that were differentially expressed (Fold Change ≥ 2.0 and P-value ≤ 0.05) after treatment with TSA (right) compared with 1% DMSO (left), which was used as negative control. Red coloring indicates up-regulated and green indicates means down-regulated expression. B. Expression of TACC3 mRNA (upper panels) and protein (lower panels) in TFK-1 and HuCTT-1 cells was validated by qRT-PCR and WB. Cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of TSA and SAHA (respective IC50 values at 48 hours). 1% DMSO treatment was used as negative control and β-actin was used as the internal control. These experiments were repeated three times, and data are shown as mean ± SD, *P<0.05. C. Expression of TACC3 mRNA and protein in CCA samples and adjacent non-tumor bile duct tissues (n=26) was analyzed by qRT-PCR (P=0.006) and WB (P=0.013). Representative images are shown in the upper panel. β-actin (or ACTB) was used as the internal control, experiments were repeated three times, and data are shown as mean ± SD, *P<0.05. D. The expression of TACC3 in CCA tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues (n=79) analyzed by IHC. (a) negative TACC3 staining in adjacent non-tumor bile duct tissues (200X); (b) negative TACC3 staining in CCA tissues (400X); (c) weak TACC3 staining in the cytoplasm (400X); (d) moderate TACC3 staining in the cytoplasm (400X); (e, f) strong TACC3 staining in the cytoplasm (200X,400X). Scale bar, 100 μm. E. Kaplan-Meier analysis showing that patients with low TACC3 expression (n=34) had longer OS than patients with high TACC3 expression (n=45; median OS: 40 months vs 17 months, P<0.001). Patients in stage I-II with low TACC3 expression (n=27) had longer OS than patients with high TACC3 expression (n=18; median OS: 42 months vs 17 months, P=0.0077). However, there was no correlation observed in patients with stage III-IV CCA (median OS: 40 months vs 25 months, P=0.2454, log-rank test).
          
          
        
        Next, we investigated the expression of TACC3 protein in CCA cell lines by WB. TACC3 was also down-regulated after cells were treated with HDACIs (P<0.05; Figure 3B), but TSA more effectively down-regulated TACC3 expression than SAHA in CCA cells. These findings were investigated further with qRT-PCR and WB in 26 pairs of CCA tissues and non-tumor tissues. We found that TACC3 expression was higher in CCA tissues than in adjacent non-tumor tissues at both the mRNA and protein levels (P<0.05; Figure 3C). IHC studies on 79 paraffin-embedded CCA specimens indicated that TACC3 was localized to the cytoplasm of CCA cells (Figure 3D). The expression of TACC3 in CCA tissues was higher than in the paired adjacent non-tumor tissues (P=0.008; Table 1). These findings strongly suggested that TACC3 was down-regulated after treatment with HDACIs and up-regulated in CCA tissues compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues, and that TACC3 may be a potential anti-tumor molecular drug target of HDACIs in CCA.
        To investigate whether TACC3 expression is correlated with CCA progression, we analyzed its association with the clinicopathological characteristics of CCA specimens. As shown in Table 1, there was a strong correlation between high TACC3 expression and lymph node status (P=0.003), TNM stage (P<0.001), and differentiation (P<0.001), but not with age (P=0.259) or gender (P=0.238). Kaplan-Meier analysis suggested that OS was shorter for patients with high TACC3 expression than for those with low TACC3 expression (P<0.001; Figure 3E). Furthermore, TACC3 expression was correlated with OS in patients with stage I-II disease (n=45; P=0.0077; Figure 3E), but not in patients with stage III-IV disease (n=34; P=0.2454; Figure 3E). Additionally, multivariate analysis showed that TACC3 expression was an independent prognostic factor for OS in patients with CCA (95%CI: 1.503–3.1670; P=0.0063; Table 2).
      
      
        Knockdown of TACC3 suppresses the proliferation, migration, and invasiveness of CCA cells
        To investigate the potential roles of TACC3 in CCA tumorigenesis, we stably knocked down TACC3 in TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells with lentiviral transfection of two TACC3 shRNA duplexes. For the rescue experiment, lentiviruses carrying TACC3 cDNA were re-transfected into the cells with TACC3 shRNA or transfected into TSA-treated cells. qRT-PCR, WB, and immunofluorescence (IF) analyses confirmed that TACC3 expression was down-regulated in cells treated with TSA or TACC3 shRNA (P<0.05; Figure 4A&4B), while the expression of TACC3 was rescued in cells transfected with TACC3 cDNA (P<0.05; Figure 4A&4B). Compared with the blank and negative control (NC) groups, TSA treatment and TACC3 shRNA treatment resulted in markedly lower cell viability (P<0.05; Figure 4C). TSA treatment reduced the number of colonies formed compared with the NC group (TFK-1: 44±16.5 vs 276±25.1 cells per well, P<0.001; HuCCT-1: 52.7±21.9 vs 243.3±32.2 cells per well, P<0.001), and when TSA-treated cells were transfected with TACC3 cDNA, the number of colonies formed was increased compared with TSA treatment (TFK-1: 130.7±43.6 vs 44±16.5 cells per well, P<0.05; HuCCT-1: 120.5±27.2 vs 52.7±21.9 cells per well, P<0.05). Similarly, there was a decrease in the number of colonies formed in cells with TACC3 shRNA knockdown compared with the NC group (TFK-1: 29.3±10.1 & 30±17.6 vs 276±25.1 cells per well, P<0.001; HuCCT-1: 23.3±15.3 & 49.7±17.9 vs 243.3±32.2 cells per well, P<0.001), while TACC3 shRNA cells given TACC3 cDNA had increased colony formation (TFK-1: 29.3±10.1 & 30±17.6 vs 150±36.1 cells per well, P<0.05 ; HuCCT-1: 24.3±15.3 & 49.7±17.9 vs 153.3±41.6 cells per well, P<0.05, Figure 4D). These results indicated a growth-promoting role of TACC3 in CCA cells.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Knockdown of TACC3 suppresses proliferation and colony formation of CCA cells
            TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells were treated with TSA or small interfering RNAs as indicated, and empty vector was used as the negative control (NC). A. qRT-PCR and western blot assays were used to detect the expression of TACC3. For WB analysis, representative imagines are shown (middle panels). Statistical analysis of the relative optical density of each band is shown (lower panels). β-actin was used as an internal control, experiments were repeated three times, and data are shown as mean ± SD, *P<0.05. B. Immunofluorescence was used to detect the expression of TACC3 (green). DAPI (blue) was used to stain the nuclei. The fluorescence intensity of TACC3 was stronger in NC groups, and was weaker in cells treated with TSA or transfected with shRNA. In the TACC3 shRNA rescue experiment, fluorescence intensity was recovered. One representative experiment out of the three performed is shown (400X). C. Survival rate of TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells was detected by CCK-8 assay. Experiments were repeated three times and data are shown as mean ± SD. D. Colony formation assays were performed to evaluate the proliferative capability of TFK-1 (upper panel) and HuCCT-1(lower panel) cells. A representative image is shown, and a statistical comparison of the indicated groups was performed across three independent experiments, *P<0.05 and **P<0.001.
          
          
        
        To explore the effects of TACC3 on the cell cycle, FACS was used to assess cell cycle distributions following TACC3 silencing or overexpression. Knockdown of TACC3 promoted G2/M arrest (P<0.05, Figure 5A), whereas G1/S transition was suppressed in TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells. In addition, when TACC3 knockdown cells were given TACC3 cDNA, the G2/M phase distribution was decreased (P<0.05, Figure 5A). Moreover, the expression of G2/M phase checkpoint proteins, CDK1 and cyclin B1 were down-regulated with TACC3 knockdown (P<0.05, Figure 5B), and up-regulated when TACC3 knockdown cells were given TACC3 cDNA (P<0.05, Figure 5B). Furthermore, wound healing occurred more slowly in cells treated with TSA or transfected with TACC3 shRNA compared with the NC cells (P<0.001; Figure 5C). When cells were transfected with TACC3 cDNA, cell migration was enhanced compared with TSA treatment or TACC3 knockdown (TFK-1: P<0.05; HuCCT-1: P<0.001; Figure 5C). Likewise, treatment with TSA or knockdown of TACC3 expression reduced the invasiveness of CCA cells compared with the NC group (P<0.001; Figure 5D), while TACC3 up-regulation enhanced cell invasion capability (P<0.05; Figure 5D). Finally, we used WB to assay the expression of EMT-associated proteins in TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells after TSA treatment or transfection with TACC3 shRNA. Knockdown of TACC3 increased E-cadherin expression and decreased vimentin expression (P<0.05; Figure 5E). Expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3, which correlated with lymphatic metastasis and prognosis in CCA patients, were also decreased (P<0.05; Figure 5E). With TACC3 rescue, the expression of vimentin, HDAC2, and HDAC3 were elevated, while E-cadherin expression was decreased (P<0.05; Figure 5E). These results indicated that knockdown of TACC3 suppresses the proliferation, migration, and invasion ability of CCA cells and suggested that TACC3 is an anti-cancer molecular drug target of HDACIs.
        
          Figure 5
          
            Knockdown of TACC3 induces G2/M cell cycle arrest and suppresses the migration and invasion of CCA cells
            For all experiments, cells transfected with empty vector were used as negative control (NC), and experiments were repeated three times. Data are shown as mean ± SD. A. FACS analysis was used to investigate differences in cell cycle distribution following TACC3 silencing or overexpression. TACC3 silencing drove G2/M arrest in TFK-1 (upper panels) and HuCCT-1 (lower panels) cells. In addition, when TACC3 knockdown cells were given TACC3 cDNA, the G2/M phase distribution was decreased. *P<0.05. B. WB results indicated that the expression of CDK1 and cyclin B1 were down-regulated with TACC3 knockdown, and were up-regulated when cells were given TACC3 cDNA. Representative imagines are shown (left panels). Statistical analysis of the relative optical density of each band is shown (right panels). β-actin was used as an internal control, *P<0.05. C. Wound healing assays was performed to explore the migration capability, and solid lines represent the wound edges. Images were captured using light microscopy (4X). The migration index was calculated as described in the Materials and Methods (TFK-1, upper panels; HuCCT-1, lower panels). Representative images are shown (left panel). Statistical analysis is shown (right panel), *P<0.05 and **P<0.001. D. Transwell assay was used to investigate the invasiveness of cells. The number of cells that invaded through the membrane was determined under a light microscope (200X). Representative images are shown (left panel). Statistical analysis is shown (right panel), *P<0.05 and **P<0.001. E. Western blot assay was employed to investigate the expression of E-cadherin, vimentin, HDAC2, and HDAC3. Representative images are shown (left panels). Statistical analysis of the relative optical density of each band is shown (right panels). β-actin was used as an internal control, *P<0.05.
          
          
        
      
      
        Targeted silencing of TACC3 suppresses CCA tumorigenicity and metastasis in vivo
        To further investigate the potential therapeutic role of TACC3 in CCA, a subcutaneous tumor model was established in nude mice. Xenograft tumors grown from blank and NC cells had larger mean volumes and weights and were frequently more aggressive than tumors grown from cells transfected with TACC3 shRNA (HuCCT-1, P<0.001; TFK-1, P<0.001; Figure 6A). Next, a pulmonary metastasis tumor model was generated by injection of tumor cells into the tail vein of nude mice. Fewer metastatic nodes were detected in the pulmonary tissues of the treatment groups (TFK-1: TACC3 shRNA-1, P<0.05; TACC3 shRNA-2, P<0.001; Figure 6B). qRT-PCR, WB and IHC were performed to verify knockdown of TACC3. Expression of TACC3 was decreased in subcutaneous tumors formed by cells that were transfected with TACC3 shRNA (P<0.05; Figure 6C&6D). These results indicated that targeted TACC3 knockdown suppresses tumor growth and metastasis of CCA cells, in vivo.
        
          Figure 6
          
            Targeted silencing of TACC3 suppresses CCA tumorigenicity and metastasis, in vivo.
            A. The effects of TACC3 silencing on tumor suppression in vivo. Images of tumors formed in nude mice injected subcutaneously with HuCCT-1 cells transfected with the blank, negative vector, and TACC3 shRNA-1 (upper). Images of tumors formed in nude mice injected subcutaneously with TFK-1 cells transfected with the blank, negative vector and TACC3 shRNA-2 (lower). Tumor growth curves are plotted (right). **P<0.001. B. A pulmonary metastasis model was established after 6 weeks of the indicated treatment. Images from the pulmonary metastasis model (upper panel) and the corresponding statistical analysis (lower panel) are shown. *P<0.05 and **P<0.001. C. qRT-PCR (upper panel) and WB (middle and lower panel) were used to assess TACC3 mRNA and protein expression in tumor xenografts. *P<0.05. D. IHC was used to detect the expression of TACC3 in tumor xenografts and pulmonary metastasis tumor tissues (400X). Scale bar, 100 μm.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      CCA is the second most common hepatobiliary malignancy [1] and is one of the most life-threatening diseases due to its aggressiveness and metastatic tendencies [36]. In spite of substantial progress, we still lack a valid biomarker that is involved in tumor proliferation, invasion, and metastasis in patients with CCA. Therefore, it is urgent to find a new molecular target for therapy and to predict the prognosis of patients with CCA. Many studies have reported the differential expression of specific HDAC isoforms in a variety of hematological or solid malignancies and cell lines, such as lymphoma [14], breast [15], gastric [16], colorectal [17], and lung cancers [18], hepatocellular carcinoma [19], and cholangiocarcinoma [20]. Class I and II HDACs are overexpressed in a variety of CCA cell lines; however, few studies have investigated HDAC expression status and its prognostic value in CCA patients [20]. In this study, we investigated the expression of HDACs 1-10 and their biological significance in CCA. We found that HDACs 2, 3 and 8 were up-regulated at the mRNA and protein levels in CCA tissues compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues. In addition, the expression of HDACs 2 and 3 proteins, but not HDAC8, was positively correlated with lymph node metastasis, TNM stage, and differentiation. Moreover, patients with high expression of HDAC2 or HDAC3 (or both) had shorter OS. These results indicated that HDAC2 and 3 may serve as useful prognostic biomarkers and that the modulation of the histone acetylation may be a novel therapeutic strategy for CCA. HDACIs have the potential to disrupt multiple signaling pathways to inhibit tumor growth and induce apoptosis [37, 38]. Our data showed that TSA and SAHA inhibited the proliferation of CCA cells and induced apoptosis as well as G2/M cell cycle arrest. Mottamal et al. reported that Epoxide 1-Alaninechlamydocin isolated from Tolypocladium sp. also elicited potent anti-proliferative effects, induction of G2/M cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in human cancer cells [39]. Our results are consistent with those of an earlier report that claimed that TSA induced a delay in G2/M transition of HeLa cells via the downregulation of Cyclin B1, PIK1 and Survivin, and via the upregulation of p21WAF1/CIP1 [40].
      Furthermore, to identify the target transcripts of HDACIs that may be potential regulators of the suppression of CCA tumorigenesis, we determined mRNA expression profiles by microarray analysis. The microarray results revealed that the expression of TACC3 was down-regulated in CCA cell lines upon treatment with TSA, a finding confirmed by qRT-PCT and WB. Until recently, it has been unclear whether TACC3 acts as an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene. Accumulating evidence indicates that alterations in TACC3 expression depend on the organ and type of cancer [30–35]. In this study, we found that TACC3 was overexpressed in CCA tissues and was positively correlated with lymph node metastasis, TNM stage, and differentiation. In addition, patients whose tumors had high TACC3 expression exhibited a shortened survival time, and this correlation was more obvious in patients with stage I-II cancers compared with patients with stage III-IV cancers. Our study demonstrated that TACC3 may be a potential anti-cancer molecular drug target of HDACIs and a potential prognostic indicator for CCA.
      Recently, various reports have suggested that TACC3 may be a potential therapeutic target and that the targeted knockdown of TACC3 can inhibit tumor cell proliferation and induce apoptosis. TACC3 overexpression is associated with defective checkpoint control and impaired DNA repair systems, resulting in genomic instability [41]. Additionally, TACC3 participates in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and transcription [27]. HDACIs decrease ionic interactions between DNA and histones, which results in chromatin relaxation and the subsequent acceleration of DNA transcription. However, the exact relationship of HDACIs and TACC3 has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we demonstrated that HDACIs downregulate TACC3 expression and that targeted TACC3 knockdown suppresses CCA cell proliferation and colony formation, and induces G2/M phase arrest in vitro. These findings are in agreement with previous studies that down-regulated TACC3 inhibits cell growth in esophageal cancer [42]. In addition, TACC3-depleted cells were highly sensitive to paclitaxel-induced cell death, which occurred even when the levels of active Akt and p21 were high [43]. Moreover, Yim et al. also reported that TACC3 knockdown combined with paclitaxel treatment led to a synergistic acceleration of G2/M phase arrest and apoptosis in HeLa cells [44]. Taken together, these findings indicate that TACC3 may be a potential anti-cancer molecular target either in combination with other drugs or alone.
      EMT is a pivotal process in the early phase of the metastasis cascade and can be initiated by various signaling pathways [45]. Up-regulated expression of TACC3 promotes EGF-mediated EMT via the initiation of the PI3K/Akt and ERK signaling transduction pathways [27, 29]. To investigate whether alterations in TACC3 gene expression impact the ability of CCA cells to invade and migrate, wound-healing and Transwell assays were performed. We found that knockdown of TACC3 reduced the invasive and migratory ability of CCA cells, while increased TACC3 expression increased invasion and migration. In addition, elevated expression of the epithelial marker, E-cadherin, and reduced expression of the mesenchymal marker, vimentin, after TACC3 knockdown verified the role of TACC3 in EMT. These findings indicated that TACC3 might act as an important regulator of CCA metastasis.
      Based on our interesting in vitro findings, we next established subcutaneous and pulmonary metastasis tumor models to further investigate the potential therapeutic role of TACC3 in CCA, in vivo. We found that targeted silencing of TACC3 markedly inhibited xenograft tumor growth and the formation of pulmonary metastatic nodes, suggesting that down-regulation of TACC3 suppresses EMT-induced invasion and metastasis. Another study demonstrated that TACC3 suppression causes tumor regression and leads to embryonic lethality in mice due to massive apoptosis in tumor, but not normal, tissues [46]. Therefore, the targeted silencing of TACC3 may be a valid approach for anti-tumor therapy for CCA; however, its mechanism still needs further experimental exploration.
      In summary, we observed that HDACs 2, 3, and 8 were over-expressed in CCA tissues and that HDACs 2 and 3 may serve as useful prognostic biomarkers for CCA. The HDACIs, TSA and SAHA, inhibited the proliferation of CCA cells and induced apoptosis and G2/M cell cycle arrest. Microarray analysis demonstrated that TSA led to the down-regulation of TACC3, and that patients with CCA with a high TACC3 expression were predicted to have a poor prognosis. Therefore, targeted TACC3 silencing may be a valid approach for anti-tumor therapy for patients with CCA.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Patients and tissue specimens
        Two independent series including 105 patients with CCA were enrolled in this study. Group 1: 4% paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded paired tissues, which included CCA samples and adjacent non-tumor tissues (2 cm away from the tumor boundaries) were obtained from 79 CCA patients who underwent resection between January 2008 and July 2010 at the Department of Biliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. The clinicopathological information of the 79 patients with CCA is listed in Supplementary Table S1. Group 2: twenty-six fresh CCA samples and adjacent non-tumor tissues were collected from the same hospital between January 2014 and December 2014. None of the patients had received any chemotherapy or radiotherapy prior to surgery. All diagnoses were confirmed by 2 pathologists at Tongji Hospital. Tumor staging was based on the TNM classification standard of the 7th edition of the UICC/AJCC staging manual. All patients signed an informed consent before surgery, and the ethics approval for this study was obtained from the Tongji Hospital Research Ethics Committee (Supplementary Figure S1).
      
      
        Cell lines
        Two human CCA cell lines, TFK-1 and HuCCT-1, were kindly provided by Professor Peter Schemmer (Department of General and Transplant Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany). The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Gibco, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco, CA, USA), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Beijing, China) and were maintained at 37°C in an incubator with 5% CO2.
      
      
        Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis
        Total RNA was isolated from tissue specimens or from cell lines using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using 2 μg of the total RNA according to the instructions of the reverse transcriptase kit (Takara Bio, Inc., Dalian, China) in a LifePro Thermal Cycler (Hangzhou Bioer Technology Co. Ltd., Hangzhou, China). Then, cDNA samples (2 μl) were subjected to qRT-PCR using a SYBR® Premix EX Taq kit (Takara Bio, Inc., Dalian, China) for 40 cycles in a CFX ConnectTM Real-Time System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). ACTB was used as an internal control. Primers were designed and synthesized by Shanghai Sango Biotech Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China (listed in Supplementary Table S2). The cycle threshold (Ct) of different genes was first normalized to ACTB for the same sample, and fold changes were calculated through relative quantification (2−ΔΔCt).
      
      
        Western blotting (WB) analysis
        WB analysis was performed as previous described [47, 48]. As an internal control, blots were incubated with antibodies to glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) or β-actin. The primary antibodies used are listed in Supplementary Table S3. To quantify the relative levels of protein expression, the intensity of the specific bands was estimated using the Image J2X analysis software package (National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
      
      
        Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
        The streptavidin biotin compound (SABC) method was used to detect the expression of HDAC2, 3, 8 and TACC3 proteins, as previously described [47]. The sections were incubated with a polyclonal or a monoclonal antibody overnight at 4°C in a moist chamber at the indicated dilutions (listed in Supplementary Table S3). The next day, the sections were incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody for 30 min at 37°C. Finally, the sections were incubated with streptavidin-biotin complex (Boster Biotech, Wuhan, China) at a dilution of 1:100 for 5 min and counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin, which stains the nucleus. The slides were dehydrated, mounted, and observed by microscopy. IHC scores were assessed by 3 pathologists who were blinded to the patient conditions, as previously described [47].
      
      
        Microarray analysis
        TFK-1 cells that were treated with 1% DMSO and TSA (0.3 μmol/L) for 48 hours were selected for microarray analysis; cells selection occurred in triplicate. Total RNA was isolated from cell lines using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, CA, USA), the concentration of RNA in the samples was detected by a NanoDrop ND-2000 (Thermo Scientific) and RNA integrity was assessed by an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). Briefly, cDNA was synthesized and labeled (Cyanine-3-CTP) before it was purified and hybridized to the microarray (Agilent SurePrint G3 Human Gene Expression Array, 8*60K, Design ID: 039494). After washing, the arrays were scanned by an Agilent Scanner G2505C (Agilent Technologies). Original data were extracted using Feature Extraction software (version 10.7.1.1, Agilent Technologies). Further data analysis was conducted using Agilent Genespring software (version 12.5). To identify significant differential expression of mRNAs, we performed a Volcano Plot filtering (Fold Change >=2.0 and P-value <=0.05) between the DMSO group and the TSA-treated group. After that, the significantly differentially expressed genes were further analyzed by GO and KEGG software to judge their biological function and the pathways through which they function. Finally, hierarchical clustering was performed based on the significant differential expression of mRNAs, and a thermograph was used to demonstrate the expression patterns of the differentially expressed genes between both groups.
      
      
        Cell viability assay in vitro
        A CCK-8 kit (Dojindo Laboratories Co. Ltd, Kumamoto, Japan) was used as a colorimetric assay to assess cell viability. Briefly, cells (5 × 103 cells/well) were seeded into 96-well plates with 100 μl per well of RPMI-1640 culture medium supplemented with 10% FBS and the indicated reagents. Each sample had six replicates. At the indicated time points, the medium was replaced by 100 μl fresh culture medium, and 10 μl CCK-8 solution was added to each well. Plates were incubated for 1-4 hours at 37°C before the absorbance was recorded at 450 nm using a Quant ELISA Reader (BioTek Instruments, USA). The percentage of viable cells was calculated according to the following method in a previously published report [48]: Survival Rate % =(ODtreated − ODblank)/(ODcontrol − ODblank) × 100%. The IC50 was calculated using probit regression analysis. The tests were repeated at least 3 times.
      
      
        Flow cytometry
        Cells (5 × 103 cells/well) were seeded into 6-well plates and allowed to adhere overnight. Then, the medium was replaced by 2 ml fresh experimental medium containing TSA or SAHA at different concentrations according to the 48-hour IC50 values. After 48 hours, cells were harvested, and the rate of apoptosis was determined by an Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis detection kit (KeyGen Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Nanjing, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo software. For cell cycle analysis, after 48 hours the cells were fixed in 70% ethanol overnight at 20°C, stained with propidium iodide, and then analyzed by a FACScan flow cytometer (Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and ModFit 3.0 software (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME, USA).
      
      
        Lentiviral vector construction and establishment stable cell clones
        Three recombinant lentiviruses containing TACC3 (GenBank access number: NM_006342.2) expressing TACC3-shRNA-1 (GCATGCACGGTGCAAATGA), TACC3-shRNA-2 (CCACAGATCTGAACTCCAT) and TACC3-specific cDNA were purchased from Genechem Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). The GV248 vector (hU6-MCS-Ubiquitin-EGFP-IRES-puromycin) used for the stable expression of shRNA against TACC3 and a fluorescent marker (GFP-RFP fusion protein) contained a puromycin resistance gene. The negative control (NC) sequence was indicated as “NC” and had no homology to any human genomic sequences. In addition, the cDNA of the human TACC3 gene, a fragment encoding the TACC3-sequence plus 1439 bp at both 5’- and 3’- flanking regions was amplified with the primers 5’- GAGGATCCCCGGGTACCGGTCGCCACCATGAGTCTGCAGGTCTTAAACGAC-3’ (forward) and 5’- TCCTTGTAGTCCATACCGATCTTCTCCATCTTGGAGATGAG-3’(reverse) by PCR from human genomic DNA and then cloned into the AgeI/NheI sites of GV358. Lentiviral transfection was conducted according to the GenePharma Recombinant Lentivirus Operation Manual (http://www.genepharma.com). TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells (1 × 105 cells/well) were seeded into 6-well plates for 24 hours, and after the addition of polybrene (8 μg/ml), the cells were infected with 2 μl of concentrated lentivirus for 72 hours. Cells were selected for 2 weeks with the addition of puromycin (5 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich, St, Louis, USA) to generate stable monoclonal cell lines. For the rescue experiment, stable cells with TACC3 shRNA or cells treated with TSA (0.3 μmol/L) for 48 hours were grown in 6-well plates, and re-infected with 2 μl of concentrated lentivirus for 72 hours. Cells were selected for 2 weeks by the addition of puromycin to generate stable monoclonal cell lines. The expression of TACC3 was confirmed by qRT-PCR, WB, and immunofluorescence.
      
      
        Immunofluorescence (IF) assay
        Cells grown on cover slips in 6-well plates were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes at room temperature and then permeabilized by treatment with 0.4% Triton X-100 (Amresco, OH, USA) for 10 minutes. After blocking with 1% BSA (Amresco, OH, USA) in 1X PBS (2 ml) for 30 minutes at 37°C, the cells were incubated at 4°C overnight with the primary antibody (TACC3, 1:50). Then, the cells were rinsed and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C with fluorescein (FITC)-conjugated Affinipure goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L; 1:20, ProteinTech Group) as the secondary antibody. After the cells were washed in PBS, the nuclei were stained by DAPI (5 μg/ml, Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) for 2 minutes at room temperature. Images were captured using a fluorescence microscope (OLYMPUS, Japan).
      
      
        Colony formation assay
        Cells (500 cells/well) were seeded into 6-well plates and cultured for 2 weeks. After fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes, cells were stained with 1% crystal violet. Colonies with diameters greater than 100 μm were counted, and experiments were run independently in triplicate.
      
      
        Wound healing assay
        Cells were seeded into 6-well plates and cultured until they reached sufficient confluence. The cell monolayers were scratched manually with a 200 μl pipette tip. The plates were washed with PBS twice to remove floating cells. Cells were then incubated in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 1% FBS for 48 hours after the scratches were generated. Images of 6 random fields were captured by phase contrast microscopy (Nikon Corporation) for quantitative analysis. The area into which the cells migrated was measured using the Image Pro Plus v6.0 software package (Media Cybernetics Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA).
      
      
        Transwell assay
        Transwell chambers (Corning NY, USA) were pretreated with a mixture of RPMI-1640 and BD Matrigel (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA) (90 μl; 8:1), which served as the basement membrane. After the membrane was hydrated in 0.1% BSA, cells (1 × 105 cells/chamber) were seeded into the top chamber with 200 μl RPMI-1640 supplemented with 0.2% FBS. After 48 hours, cells were fixed and stained. Cell counts were performed using the Image-Pro Plus v6.0 software package (Media Cybernetics Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA). Each group of cells was counted in triplicate.
      
      
        In vivo tumorigenicity and metastasis assays
        For the tumorigenicity assay, TFK-1 and HuCCT-1 cells (2 × 106 cells, suspended in 100 μl RPMI-1640 without FBS) were subcutaneously injected into the upper right flank of nude mice (4-6 week-old, BALB/c/nu, female). Tumor sizes were measured by a vernier caliper every three days. Mice were sacrificed three weeks after the injection of the cells. For the metastasis assay, TFK-1 cells were injected into the tail vein of nude mice. After 6 weeks, mice were sacrificed, and the metastatic nodes in the lungs were examined by necropsy and counted. All of the in vivo experiments were performed in specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions with the approval of the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Tongji Medical College. Details are provided in the Supplementary Figure S2.
      
      
        Statistical analyses
        Quantitatative data are presented as the means ± the standard deviation (SD). Significance was assessed using 2-tailed Student's t-test, analysis of variance (ANOVA), or Pearson's correlation test, when applicable. Categorical data were analyzed by the χ2 test. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank analyses were used to assess survival among the subgroups. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to determine the independent survival factors based on the variables selected in the univariate and multivariate analyses. P values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. All analyses were performed with SPSS 19.0 by the Statistics Teaching Room of Tongji Medical Collage, HUST.
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
    
  
        Macrophages occur as resident cells of fetal origin or as infiltrating blood monocyte-derived cells. Despite the critical role of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in tumor progression, the contribution of these developmentally and functionally distinct macrophage subsets and their alteration by the tumor microenvironment are poorly understood. We have addressed this question by comparing TAMs from human ovarian carcinoma ascites, resident peritoneal macrophages (pMPHs) and monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). Our study revealed striking a similarity between TAMs and pMPHs, which was considerably greater that the resemblance of TAMs and MDMs, including their transcriptomes, their inflammation-related activation state, the presence of receptors mediating immune functions and the expression of tumor-promoting mediators. Consistent with these results, TAMs phagocytized bacteria, presented peptide antigens and activated cytotoxic T cells within their pathophysiological environment. These observations support the notion that tumor-promoting properties of TAMs may reflect, at least to some extent, normal features of resident macrophages rather than functions induced by the tumor microenvironment. In spite of these surprising similarities between TAMs and pMPHs, bioinformatic analyses identified a TAM-selective signature of 30 genes that are upregulated relative to both pMPHs and MDMs. The majority of these genes is linked to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, supporting a role for TAMs in cancer cell invasion and ovarian cancer progression.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC) is the most common ovarian malignancy with a dire prognosis with an overall 5-year survival rate of <40% [1]. The features that contribute to the fatal nature of ovarian HGSC and distinguish this cancer from other human malignancies include the peritoneal environment, which is frequently formed by the effusion building up in the peritoneal cavity. This malignancy associated ascites is rich in tumor-promoting soluble factors [2] and immune cells, in particular tumor-associated T cells (TATs) [3] and tumor-associated macrophages [4, 5] (TAMs).
      TAMs play a crucial role in promoting tumor cell proliferation, dissemination, chemoresistance and immune evasion, as suggested by the correlation of disease progression with macrophage density in different types of human cancer and mouse models, including ovarian HGSC [6–8]. Although TAMs can be derived from recruited blood monocytes [9–11], more recent evidence clearly points to a substantial contribution by tissue-resident macrophages [12–18].
      A hallmark of macrophages is their plasticity in response to their microenvironment [19], with “M1” and “M2” macrophages as operationally defined extremes [20]. Classical M1 activation confers immune stimulatory, pro-inflammatory properties, while alternatively activated M2 macrophages comprise a wide spectrum of subtypes with functions in tissue repair, angiogenesis and immune regulation. TAMs have been proposed to resemble “M2” macrophages, in agreement with their role in tumor promotion and immune suppression. Consistent with this conclusion, expression of the classical M2 marker CD163 on TAMs showed a strong correlation with early relapse of serous ovarian carcinoma after first-line therapy [4]. Furthermore, data derived from mouse models showed that pro-inflammatory signaling pathways are defective in TAMs [7, 20–23]. However, macrophages can also adopt properties of both M1 and M2 cells [19], and several studies suggest that TAMs represent such a mixed-polarization phenotype [4, 11, 20, 24].
      Macrophages in the adult mouse can have two developmentally different origins. While infiltrating macrophages are derived from blood monocytes produced by the bone marrow, tissue macrophages, including alveolar, peritoneal, splenic, hepatic (Kupfer cells) and dermal (Langerhans cells) macrophages, are of fetal (yolk sac) origin [17, 25–30]. The transcription factor MYB is essential for the development of murine bone-marrow macrophages [25], whereas GATA6 is indispensable for the fetal lineage and distinguishes resident from infiltrating macrophage [26, 31]. Whether ovarian cancer ascites-associated macrophages are derived from infiltrating monocytes, resident peritoneal macrophages or both is unclear.
      Our current view of the tumor-mediated activation state of macrophages is largely based on studies comparing TAMs to monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) [9, 32]. Systematic analyses comparing TAMs to normal, uncultured macrophages are currently not available. The present study reveals for the first time a surprising similarity between TAMs and resident peritoneal macrophages (pMPHs) with respect to both their differentiation and polarization state, but also delineates a TAM-selective signature associated that is associated with extracellular matrix remodeling.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Similar expression of differentiation and activation markers by TAMs and pMPHs
        We first compared pMPHs from patients undergoing hysterectomy for non-malignant diseases and TAMs from ovarian cancer ascites (Supplementary Table S1) for expression of inflammation and activation markers by flow cytometry. The data in Figure 1A and 1B show that surface expression of the Fcγ receptors CD16 (FCGR3), CD32 (FCGR2) and CD64 (FCGR1) was similar for both cell types, with respect to both the fraction of positive cells (Figure 1A) and the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI; Figure 1B). HLA-DR was expressed on >95% of all cells analyzed, but the measured MFI was clearly higher on MPHs (Figure 1B). The “M2” markers CD163, CD206 and intracellular IL-10 were similarly expressed by both TAMs and pMPHs, except for a tendency towards a higher fraction of CD163+ and CD206+ in MPH samples (Figure 1B). Our data also indicate that neither CD163 nor CD206 distinguishes TAMs from pMPHs, regardless of the underlying non-malignant condition of the patients (Figure 1C). Consistent with our observation, human pMPHs have previously been shown to express high levels of CD163 and display characteristics of anti-inflammatory macrophages [33]. Thus, while there are detectable differences between TAMs and pMPHs, both cell types do not differ in terms of a directional inflammation-related polarization switch.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Similarities of TAMs and pMPHs
            A, B. Flow cytometry analysis of freshly isolated TAMs and MPHs for cell surface receptor and intracellular IL-10 expression. The data show the fraction of CD14+ cells (A) or the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of positive cells (B). Sample sizes were n=71 (TAM) and n=10 (pMPH), respectively. C. Quantification of CD163+ and CD206+ cells in TAM (n=71) and pMPH (n=10) samples isolated from patients undergoing surgery for myomatosis (squares), ovarian cysts (triangles) or endometriosis (circle). D, E. Flow cytometry analysis of TIMD4 (% positive) and CD52 (MFI) on TAMs (n=3) and MDMs (n=3). *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ****p<0.0001 by t-test; ns: not significant; horizontal lines: median.
          
          
        
        To identify differences between TAMs and pMPHs by a systematic approach we compared the transcriptome of 17 TAM, 4 pMPH and 3 of non-polarized (M0) MDM samples by RNA sequencing (all RNA-Seq data in Supplementary Dataset S1; TAM and pMPH samples were uncultured primary cells). Pearson correlation of median gene expression values showed a high similarity of all TAM and pMPH transcriptomes (r = 0.93), while MDM were considerably more divergent (r = 0.79; Supplementary Figure S1). Pearson correlation analysis for individual samples yielded a similar result (median r = 0.84 for TAMs versus pMPHs; r = 0.74 for TAMs versus MDMs; Figure 2A, 2B). These results were confirmed by PCA which split our samples in two groups: TAM/pMPH and MDM (Figure 2C). As expected the correlation between TAMs and TATs or tumor cells was very low (r = 0.34; Figure 2B).
        
          Figure 2
          
            Similarity of TAMs and pMPH transcriptomes
            A. Correlation heatmap (Pearson r) of the transcriptomes of TAM, pMPH and MDM samples. B. Pearson correlation (r) of the TAM transcriptome to that of pMPHs, MDMs, TATs and tumor cells (TU) for all individual samples. Bars: 95% CI; horizontal lines: median. C. Principle component analysis (PCA) of TAM, pMPH and MDM samples. Sample sizes were n=16 (TAM), n=4 (pMPH), n=3 (MDM), n=5 (TAT) and n=19 (TU), respectively, in all panels.
          
          
        
        Consistent with the global resemblance of TAMs and pMPHs, at least 3 markers selectively expressed in resident macrophages in the mouse [26–29, 31, 34–36], i.e., ADGRE1 (F4/80), GATA6 and TIMD4, were expressed at similar levels in both TAMs and pMPHs, but much lower, if at all, in MDMs (Figure 3A). The opposite scenario was observed for CD52, reported to be preferentially expressed in monocyte-derived cells [37]. In agreement with these data, TIMD4 surface expression was stronger on TAMs compared to MDMs (Figure 1D), whereas CD52 was higher on MDMs (Figure 1E).
        
          Figure 3
          
            Expression of genes coding for proteins with immune or pro-tumorigenic functions by TAMs and normal macrophages
            A. Expression of genes coding for differentiation markers (resident/infiltrating macrophages), immune functions or “M1/M2” polarization markers (RNA-Seq data). B. Expression of genes associated with pro-tumorigenic functions. Boxes show the upper and lower quartiles, whiskers the 95% confidence intervals amd horizontal lines the median. Sample sizes were n=16 (TAM), n=4 (pMPH), n=4 (MDM), respectively. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ****p<0.0001 by t-test; ns: not significant.
          
          
        
        The RNA-Seq data also revealed similar expression levels in TAMs and MPHs for all markers of macrophage functions tested, including phagocytosis-associated receptor genes (CD36, MSR1, SCAR family genes, TIMD4, CD163), FCGR genes, complement receptor genes (CD93/C1Q-R1, C3AR, CR1, C5AR1) and all polarization marker genes tested, including CD163 and IL10 (Figure 3A). These observations are in perfect agreement with the flow cytometry analysis described above (Figure 1A–1C). Similar observations were made for genes encoding pro-tumorigenic cytokines or growth factor (Figure 3B), previously found to be mainly expressed by TAMs within the ovarian cancer microenvironment [38]. These results indicate that ovarian carcinoma ascites-associated TAMs closely resemble pMPHs not only with respect to their activation state but also with regard to some of their pro-tumorigenic functions.
      
      
        Immune functions of TAMs
        The similarity with pMPHs described above suggested that macrophage-mediated immune functions might be preserved in ovarian carcinoma TAMs, at least to some extent. While TAMs can be maintained ex vivo for functional assays under conditions resembling their pathophysiological microenvironment (ascites), it is not possible to culture pMPHs under physiological conditions (e.g, peritoneal fluid). We therefore focused our analyses on short-term cultures of TAMs in ascites, and used MDMs as positive controls.
        An essential function of tissue resident macrophages is the phagocytosis of pathogens and apoptotic cells [27, 33, 39–41]. Consistent with the expression pattern of phagocytosis-associated receptors (Figure 3A) the TAMs were able to efficiently phagocytize labelled E. coli particles (Figure 4A, 4B).
        
          Figure 4
          
            Immune functions of ovarian carcinoma TAMs
            A. Phagocytosis of E. coli particles conjugated to a pH-sensitive fluorochrome (pHrodo) by ovarian cancer TAMs in ascites. The plots show flow cytometry analysis of cells incubated at 37°C (active phagocytosis) and 4°C (background control). B. Quantification of 3 independent experiments as in panel A with TAMs in ascites. MDMs in RPMI medium were included as positive control. C. Antigen-specific CD8+ T cell stimulation. TAMs from the ascites of 5 ovarian cancer patients cultured in ascites were loaded with the recall antigen peptide mix CEFT and analyzed for their ability to stimulate INFγ production by co-cultured T cells. The fraction of CD8+IFNγ+ cells was determined by flow cytometry. MDMs established from 5 different donors were used as positive control. D.
IL12B expression in TAMs (n=3) cultured in autologous ascites for 2 d. Cultures were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) and INFγ (20 ng/ml) or solvent only (none) for 24 h and RNA was analyzed by RT-qPCR. MDMs (n=3) in RPMI were included as positive control. E. p40 (IL-12B/IL-23) protein concentrations in the culture medium of the experiments in panel D. Each dot represents an independent sample in B-E. Horizontal lines: median; vertical bars: range. ***p<0.001 by t-test between unstimulated and INFγ/LPS-stimulated cells in panels D and E; ns: not significant.
          
          
        
        Another function reported for human pMPHs is the presentation of peptide antigens [42–46]. In view of the high expression of HLA genes in TAMs (Figure 1) we therefore investigated the capacity of TAMs to trigger antigen-specific cytotoxic T cell activation. For this purpose, we exposed TAMs to a mixture of antigens (CEFT) derived from pathogens most individuals have previously been sensitized to and have developed antigen-specific memory T cells. Restimulation with these recall antigens results in the activation of this subset of antigen-specific T cells (1% of all T cells). Using intracellular IFNγ production as an activation marker, we found a clear stimulation of CD8+ T cells by TAMs within a range similar to the positive control (Figure 4C; non-stimulated cells served as negative controls for background substraction). Collectively, these data show that known immune functions of pMPHs are retained by TAMs in their pathophysiological environment.
        Previous studies in mouse models have shown that pro-inflammatory signaling pathways are non-functional in TAMs in different tumor types [7, 20–23], and that ovarian cancer TAMs are refractory to pro-inflammatory stimuli [47]. In agreement with these observations we found that both expression of the pro-inflammatory mediator gene IL12B and secretion of its product p40 are not inducible by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon-γ (INFγ) in TAMs, whereas a strong induction was observed with the positive control (Figure 4D, 4E).
      
      
        Genome-wide expression profiles of TAMs and pMPHs and delineation of a TAM-specific signature
        We next sought to gain further insight into the specific phenotype of ovarian cancer TAMs by in-depth analysis of the transcriptomic data. Toward this end, we started out by analyzing the RNA-Seq data sets with edgeR, a Bioconductor package specifically developed for reliable gene-specific dispersion estimation in small samples by ranking genes that behave consistently across replicates more highly than genes that do not [48, 49]. The edgeR tool identified a group of 21 genes expressed at significantly different levels in TAMs versus pMPHs (Supplementary Table S1). We then searched for genes showing highly correlated expression pattern across all TAM samples (r >0.9) and a higher median expression in TAMs versus pMPH or vice versa (FC >3-fold). This resulted in the definition of an extended datasets of 30 genes upregulated in TAMs (Supplementary Dataset S2; Supplementary Figure S2; Figure 5A). PCA of TAM, pMPH and MDM samples for the upregulated gene set yielded clearly separable clusters for TAMs versus pMPHs or MDMs (Figure 5A), showing that the chosen strategy was successful.
        
          Figure 5
          
            Identification of a transcriptional ECM signature of genes upregulated in TAMs versus normal macrophages
            A. PCA of TAM, pMPH and MDM samples for the upregulated gene set. TAM52 (x=3.4) is outside the range displayed. B. Venn diagram of genes upregulated in TAMs versus pMPHs or MDMs (FC >3; TPM>1.5). C. Functional annotation of upregulated genes by GO term analysis (Supplementary Table S3). The bar plot shows the top 5 terms (p< 0.001). D. Upstream regulator analysis (Ingenuity pathway database) of upregulated genes with a minimum overlap of gene sets of 30% (query gene set and genes targeted by indicated pathways). E. Correlation-based hierarchial clustering of upregulated genes. See Materials and Methods for details.
          
          
        
        We performed similar analyses with TAMs and MDMs (Supplementary Table S2) leading to an extended datasets of 497 upregulated genes (Figure 5B). The majority of genes upregulated in TAMs versus pMPHs (20/30) were also upregulated relative to MDMs (Figure 5B), thus providing a further validation of the upregulated gene set. Since only few genes were downregulated in TAMs versus pMPHs (n = 4; Supplementary Dataset S3; Supplementary Figure S3 and Supplementary Figure S4), we focused all further analyses on the upregulated gene set.
      
      
        A TAM-specific ECM gene cluster
        Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis showed a very strong association of the upregulated genes with extracellular matrix (ECM) and collagen fibril organization (Figure 5C; Supplementary Table S3). IPA Upstream Regulator Analysis identified these genes as targets mainly of TGFB and pro-inflammatory (LPS, TNF, INFG) signaling pathways (Figure 5D). This is intriguing in light of previous studies reporting the presence of TNFα and TGFβ1 in the ascites of the vast majority of ovarian cancer patients and their association with disease progression [2, 4, 50–53]. Hierarchial clustering using correlation as distance metric identified a group of 19 co-regulated genes, which make up 63% of all upregulated genes identified (Figures 5E and Supplementary Figure S2). Intriguingly, this cluster harbors virtually all regulated genes associated with ECM remodeling. We subsequently refer to these genes as the “ECM cluster”.
        The expression patterns of the ECM signature genes in TAMs and pMPHs shown in Figure 6A (red versus blue bars) clearly document their selective upregulation in TAMs. Similar results were obtained when expression in TAMs was compared to MDMs (red versus grey bars in Figure 6A) with only few exceptions, providing further evidence tor the robustness of the ECM signature and its association with tumor-triggered events. Comparison with tumor cells and TATs showed that most of these genes are mainly expressed by TAMs and tumor cells (Figure 6B). We also analyzed several genes of the ECM signature by RT-qPCR and could fully verify the RNA-Seq data in all for cases (Figure 6C). Finally, we also found readily detectable levels of PCOLCE2 protein by ELSIA in ovarian cancer ascites (Figure 6D), supporting a potential functional relevance of the upregulated ECM signature genes.
        
          Figure 6
          
            Expression of ECM signature genes
            A. Expression of upregulated genes across TAM, pMPH and MDM samples. Data are represented as in Figure 2. Arrows point to genes with functions in ECM remodeling. B. Expression of upregulated genes (panel B) in different ovarian carcinoma-associated cell types, pMPHs and MDMs. The stacked boxes show the respective median expression values (TPM). C. Validation of RNA-Seq data by RT-qPCR. Each symbol represents a biological replicate (TAM: n=4; MDM: n=3). Horizontal lines: median. D. Concentrations of PCOLCE 2 in ascites from ovarian HGSC patients determined by ELISA (n=10).
          
          
        
        Contamination of TAM samples with tumor cells was very low in most samples, in several cases even undetectable (Supplementary Table S4). Furthermore, none of the ECM cluster genes were expressed at substantially higher levels by tumor cells relative to TAMs (Figure 6B), thus ruling out the possibility that the expression observed in TAM samples results from residual tumor cells. Another cell type present in ascites, albeit at low numbers, are carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) [54]. Importantly, all CAF marker genes analyzed were either expressed at similar levels in both TAMs and pMPHs (Supplementary Figure S5) and/or did not show any appreciable correlation with expression of ECM cluster genes, as exemplified for COL3A1 in Supplementary Figure S6. Similar results were obtained for markers of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and mesothelial cells (Supplementary Figure S5 and Supplementary Figure S7), known to be present ovarian cancer ascites in ascites [54]. We therefore conclude that potential contaminations of TAM samples do are unlikely to make a significant contribution to the observed TAM-specific signature.
        Importantly, proteins encoded by upregulated genes are also found in the ascites fluid from ovarian cancer patients, supporting potentially relevant functions. This is exemplified in Figure 5C for PCOLCE 2 (upregulated in TAMs ~20-fold). Furthermore, previous proteomic profiling of ovarian cancer ascites identified several proteins relevant in this context, including multiple collagens and lumican [55]. In addition, collagen type I, III and IV fragments have been found at elevated levels in serum samples from ovarian cancer patients [56].
        Taken together, these observations suggest that the upregulation of ECM remodeling genes is a hallmark of ovarian cancer TAMs. The coordinate regulation of the genes within this cluster is presumably caused by a tumor-triggered signaling pathway rather than merely a consequence of a genomic co-localization. The 5 COL genes of the ECM cluster, for instance, are localized on 4 different human chromosomes (2, 7, 9 and 17), LUM on chromosome 12 and PCOLCE2 on chromosome 3 (Ensembl).
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      
        Activation state and immune functions of TAMs
        Our flow cytometry and transcriptome data clearly show that markers are expressed in ovarian cancer TAMs in a way inconsistent with a directional inflammation-related polarization. On the other hand, these analyses revealed a surprisingly high similarity of TAMs and pMPHs, including their activation state and the expression of molecules with essential roles in immune functions. Thus, tissue resident macrophages, like TAMs, are characterized by a high expression of the alternative activation markers CD163 and CD206 [33]. and both TAMs and pMPHs express genes with essential functions in phagocytosis or antigen presentation at similarly high levels (Figures 1A–1C, Figure 3A).
        Consistent with the high expression of scavenger receptors and other molecules involved in phagocytosis (Figure 3A), TAMs efficiently phagocytosed bacteria within their pathophysiological environment, i.e., ovarian cancer ascites (Figure 4A, 4B). TAMs share this function with pMPHs, known as major players in the clearance of pathogens and damaged cells [33]. Furthermore, in agreement with the strong expression of multiple HLA genes (Figure 3A), TAMs were able to trigger an antigen-specific cytotoxic T cell response (Figure 4C), which is also known as a function of pMPHs [42–45].
        Previous work has shown that peritoneal macrophages in the mouse consist of two functionally and developmentally distinct subsets, with cells of fetal origin representing the vast majority [30]. In the mouse, these resident cells differ from infiltrating monocyte-derived macrophages by the specific expression of several markers, including ADGRE1 (F4/80), GATA6 and TIMD4 [26–29, 31, 34–36]. Our data show that human pMPHs also express much higher levels of these marker genes than MDMs (Figure 1D, 1E), suggesting that these markers may also be applicable to human cells. TAMs and pMPHs showed very similar expression patterns of these markers, consistent with the hypothesis that pMPHs are a major origin of TAMs. However, it cannot be ruled out that infiltrating monocytes are converted to TAMs resembling pMPHs by tumor-borne mediators.
        Previous work has identified TAMs as the major source of a number of pro-tumorigenic or immune suppressive protein mediators within the ovarian cancer microenvironment [38], The data presented here show that the corresponding genes are expressed at similar levels in TAMs and pMPHs, while their expression is lower in MDMs in most cases (Figure 2D). It is therefore likely that some pro-tumorigenic effects mediated by TAMs reflect functions of pMPHs rather than tumor-induced alterations.
        Our data also confirm the previously described refractoriness of TAMs to inflammatory stimuli [7, 20–23, 47], exemplified by the unresponsiveness of the IL12B gene to LPS and INFγ in ovarian cancer TAMs (Figure 4D, 4E). Since pMPHs are principally inducible by pro-inflammatory stimuli (Figure 4D, E) and the induction of proinflammatory genes in MDMs is repressed by ascites (as shown for IL12B in Supplementary Figure S8), it is likely that the observed lack of TAMs to LPS and INFγ is caused by the tumor microenvironment. This suggests that ovarian cancer ascites affects macrophage functions to varying degrees, with phagocytosis and antigen presentation remaining intact and inflammatory responses being suppressed. The molecular mechanisms underlying this repression remain obscure, as the comparative RNA-Seq data did not provide insights into the transcriptional signaling pathways affected.
      
      
        Upregulation of ECM remodeling genes in TAMs
        Our study identified an ECM gene cluster as a specific feature of ovarian cancer TAMs (Figures 5 and Figure 6), suggesting that TAMs figure in collagen deposition, fibrillogenesis and ECM remodeling. In this context it is noteworthy that fibrillar collagen has been shown to enhance the invasive properties of tumor cells by accelerating their movement along these fibers and macrophages clearly enhance cancer cell invasion [6, 24]. Macrophages are also indispensable for mouse mammary gland development owing to their critical function in promoting collagen fibrillogenesis [57].
        A number of published observations have linked the products of several of the ECM cluster genes to macrophage-mediated matrix remodeling and cancer cell invasion [24]. Apart from the collagens, other proteins encoded by the ECM cluster with instrumental functions in matrix deposition and remodeling include (i) lumican (LUM), which regulates collagen fibril organization and growth [58, 59], (ii) lysyl oxidase (LOX) with crucial functions in the cross-linking of ECM proteins [60] and (iii) procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 2 (PCOLCE2), which promotes the enzymatic cleavage of type I procollagen to yield mature structured fibrils [61, 62]. Importantly, PCOLCE2 protein was detectable at appreciable levels in the ascites of ovarian cancer patients (Figure 6D).
      
      
        Clinical relevance of ECM remodelling
        On the basis of our observations it is tempting to speculate that TAMs support tumor cell adherence and invasion by secreting ECM remodeling proteins. Such a scenario is indeed strongly supported by a mouse model of transcoelomic ovarian cancer dissemination, which showed a clear dependence of peritoneal colonization on macrophage-mediated effects on the ECM through metalloproteinase 9 [63]. Furthermore, other researchers showed that macrophage depletion in mice resulted in decreased ascites formation and peritoneal colonization [64–66].
        Tumor cell spheroids from ovarian cancer ascites can adhere to, disintegrate and spread on ECM components [67, 68], suggesting that the macrophage-triggered reorganization of collagen deposition may promote ovarian cancer cell invasion. This result is consistent with previous observations associating ECM remodeling genes with a poor clinical course of ovarian cancer [51, 69–73]. For example, Cheon et al [69]. described a relapse-associated signature that consists of genes coding for collagen/ECM remodeling proteins. Intriguingly, this signature is regulated by TGFβ1 signaling as predicted for the ECM cluster identified in the present work (Figure 4D).
        Busuttil and colleagues [71] identified a “stromal-response” signature in ovarian cancer that is associated with poor survival and enriched for genes encoding inflammatory and extracellular matrix proteins expressed by the tumor-associated stroma. Furthermore, the mesenchymal subtype of ovarian HGSC, characterized by the upregulation of ECM remodeling genes, has the worst clinical outcome of all subtypes [72, 73]. Our observations extend these findings by providing compelling evidence that genes associated with ECM restructuring are coordinately upregulated in ovarian cancer TAMs. This may explain, at least in part, the critical role of macrophages in ovarian cancer progression [4, 74].
      
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Patient samples
        Clinical samples (Supplementary Table S5) were obtained from untreated patients undergoing surgery for ovarian carcinoma (mostly HGSC) or hysterectomy for non-malignant diseases lacking peritoneal effusions. Informed consent was obtained from all patients according to the protocols approved by the local ethics committee. All experiments were conducted in agreement with the Helsinki declaration.
      
      
        Isolation and culture of primary immune cells
        Macrophages were isolated from ascites (TAMs) or peritoneal lavage fluids (pMPHs) by density gradient centrifugation (Lymphocyte Separation Medium 1077; PromoCell) and subsequent enrichment on magnetic CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech). Tumor cells and CD3+ T cells were isolated as described [38]. MDMs were generated from monocytes (6-day differentiation for RNA experiments, 10-day cultures for flow cytometry) from healthy donors as described [75] and in RPMI with human AB serum.
      
      
        Flow cytometry analysis of macrophages
        TAMs from malignant ascites or pMPHs from peritoneal lavage fluid were stained with FITC-labeled anti-CD14 (Miltenyi Biotech), APC-labeled anti-CD206 (BioLegend), APC-labeled anti-HLA-DR or APC-labeled anti-CD206 (Biozol), PE-labeled anti-CD163, PE-labeled anti-CD64, PE-Cy7-labeled anti-CD16 and APC-labeled anti-CD32 (eBioscience) as described previously [4]. Intracellular staining was performed with PE-labeled anti-IL-10 (BD Biosciences) after permeabilization for 20 min at 4 C using BD Cytofix Cytoperm Plus Fixation Permeabilization Kit (BD Biosciences). Additionally, APC-labeled anti-CD52 or APC-labeled anti-TIMD4 (Biolegend) was used for surface staining of TAMs and MDMs from healthy donors. Isotype control antibodies were from BD Biosciences, Miltenyi Biotech and eBioscience. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry and results were calculated as percentage of positive cells and mean fluorescence intensities (MFI).
      
      
        ELISA of ascites
        Concentrations of PCOLCE 2 in ascites from ovarian cancer patients were determined using an ELISA Kit from Biozol according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
      
      
        T cell activation
        Antigen-specific T cell activation by macrophages was determined essentially as described [75]. In brief, MDMs or TAMs were loaded with 1μg/ml CEFT peptide pool (jpt Peptide Technologies, Berlin, Germany) as recall antigens and incubated with a 5-fold excess of lymphocytes for 18 h in the presence of Brefeldin A (Sigma Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany). Lymphocytes were harvested and stained with anti-CD8-APC (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and after permeabilization with anti-IFNγ-FITC (eBioscience, Frankfurt, Germany). Flow cytometry (FACS Canto, BD Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany) data were expressed as IFNγ+/CD8+ cells after subtracting background staining of non-stimulated controls.
      
      
        Analysis of phagocytosis
        Phagocytotic capacity was determined by incubating macrophages with pHrodo® Red E. coli BioParticles conjugate (Thermo Fisher) for 15 min in R10AB medium and subsequent quantification by flow cytometry.
      
      
        RT-qPCR
        Isolation of total RNA and RT-qPCR were carried out as described [76], using the following primers:
        RPL27_fw: 5′ AAAGCTGTCATCGTGAAGAAC
        RPL27_rv: 5′ GCTGTCACTTTGCGGGGGTAG
        IL12B_fw: 5′ GCGAGGTTCTAAGCCATTCG
        IL12B_rev: 5′ ACTCCTTGTTGTCCCCTCTG
        COL1A2_fw: 5′ AGCTCCAAGGACAAGAAAC ACGTCTGG
        COL1A2_rev: 5′ AGGCGCATGAAGGCAAG TTGGGTAG
        COL3A1_fw: 5′ CTGGACCCCAGGGTCTTC
        COL3A1_rev: 5′ CATCTGATCCAGGGTTTCCA
        LOX_fw: 5′ TGGCACAGTTGTCATCAACA
        LOX_rev: 5′ TCTTCAAGACAGAAACTT GCTTT
        LUM_fw: 5′ TGGAGGTCAATCAACTTGAGAA
        LUM_rev: 5′ CCAAACGCAAATGCTTGAT.
      
      
        RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq)
        RNA-Seq was performed as described [75]. Sequencing data were deposited at EBI ArrayExpress (E-MTAB-3167, E-MTAB-3398, E-MTAB-4162, E-MTAB-4764). Genome assembly and gene model data were retrieved from Ensembl release 81, hg38. RNA-Seq data were aligned using STAR (version STAR_2.3.1z13_r470) [77]. Gene read counts were established and TPM (transcripts per million) values were calculated as published [75]. Adjustment of RNA-Seq data for contaminating tumor and T cells was performed as describe [38]. Batch effects were removed using Bioconductor tool ComBat [78, 79] after filtering all genes with a variance <1.
      
      
        Identification of regulated genes
        RNA-Seq data (Supplementary Dataset S1) were filtered for genes with minimum TPM values of 3 and median TPM ratios TAM/TAT >0.1 and TAM/tumor cells >0.1. For the delineation of genes selectively up- or down-regulated in TAMs we applied the Bioconductor package edgeR [48, 49] and identified a group of 21 genes expressed at significantly different levels in TAMs versus pMPHs (FDR = 0.2; Supplementary Table S1). We then used this gene set to identify additional genes showing highly correlated expression patterns across all TAM samples (r >0.9) and no overlaps of TAM and pMPH samples using the upper and lower quartiles, respectively, as thresholds. Upregulated genes were defined by 2-fold higher median TPM values in TAMs versus pMPH, or vice versa for down-regulated genes. This resulted in the definition of extended datasets of 30 genes upregulated and 4 genes downregulated in TAMs (Supplementary Dataset S2 and Supplementary Dataset S3). Similar analyses performed for with TAMs and MDMs (Supplementary Table S2) lead to extended datasets of 497 upregulated genes.
      
      
        Statistical and bioinformatic analyses
        Flow cytometry, ELISA and RT-qPCR data were statistically analyzed by Student's t-test (two-sided, equal variance). Results are shown as follows: *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001. Quantiles, confidence intervals and correlation coefficients were calculated using the Python functions pandas.DataFrame.boxplot () and scipy.stats.pearsonr (), respectively. Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed using the scipy.cluster.hierarchy functions linkage (method=“weighted”, metric=“correlation”) and dendrogram (). Gene sets were analyzed for Upstream Regulators using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) database (Qiagen Redwood City, CA, USA) as described [75]. Functional annotations were performed by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (http://geneontology.org).
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        Proteins, as executives of genes' instructions, are responsible for cellular phenotypes. Integrating proteomics with gene microarray, we conducted this study to identify potential protein biomarkers of colorectal cancer (CRC). Isobaric tags with related and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to screen and identify differentially expressed proteins between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa. Meanwhile, Affymetrix U133plus2.0 microarrays were used to perform gene microarray analysis. Verification experiments included immunohistochemistry (IHC), western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of selected proteins. Overall, 5469 differentially expressed proteins were detected with iTRAQ-MS from 24 matched CRC and adjacent normal tissues. And gene microarray identified 39859 differential genes from 52 patients. Of these, 3083 differential proteins had corresponding differentially expressed genes, with 245 proteins and their genes showed >1.5-fold change in expression level. Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that up-regulated proteins were more involved in cell adhesion and motion than down-regulated proteins. In addition, up-regulated proteins were more likely to be located in nucleus and vesicles. Further verification experiments with IHC confirmed differential expression levels of 5 proteins (S100 calcium-binding protein A9, annexin A3, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, carboxylesterase 2 and calcium activated chloride channel A1) between CRC and normal tissues. Besides, western blot showed a stepwise increase of annexin A3 abundance in normal colorectal mucosa, adenoma and CRC tissues. ELISA results revealed significantly higher serum levels of S100 calcium-binding protein A9 and annexin A3 in CRC patients than healthy controls, validating diagnostic value of these proteins. Cell experiments showed that inhibition of annexin A3 could suppress CRC cell proliferation and aggressiveness. S100 calcium-binding protein A9, annexin A3, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, carboxylesterase 2 and calcium activated chloride channel A1 were probably potential biomarkers of colorectal cancer. Annexin A3 was a potentially valuable therapeutic target of CRC.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      According to statistics of World Health Organization (WHO), colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common malignancy worldwide, with it being the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths [1]. Despite diagnostic and therapeutic advancements, CRC survival rate has hardly changed over the last two decades, with over 50% of patients having regional or distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis [1]. However, 5-year survival rates of patients in different stages vary dramatically, from more than 90% in stage I to less than 10% in stage IV [1, 2]. Additionally, as a heterogeneous disease, almost every patient of CRC has his/her specific features. Therefore, early detection and individual treatment are of great significance for CRC. Screening and identifying new biomarkers are warranted to better diagnose, treat, predict and monitor recurrence of CRC.
      In the last decade, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has elucidated genomic characteristics of human cancers including glioblastoma [3], ovarian cancer [4], lung cancer [5], breast cancer [6], colorectal cancer [7] and endometrial carcinoma [8]. As executives of genes' instructions, proteins are responsible for cellular phenotypes. Since the existence of post-transcriptional and -translational modifications, cancer proteomics is more complex than genomics. However, so far, there are few integrative analyses of proteomic and genomic data for cancers including CRC, which presents an urgent need to integrate proteomics with genomics to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of bioinformation flow in cancer cells.
      In this study, we applied high-throughput proteomics integrated with gene microarray to screen and identify potential biomarkers of CRC. Isobaric tags with related and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling mass spectrometry (MS) was used as proteomic tool. Meanwhile Affymetrix U133plus2.0 microarrays were applied as gene microarray analysis method. In total, we identified and quantitated 3083 proteins/genes expressed simultaneously in paired colorectal cancer (CRC) and adjacent normal mucosa by iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS and gene microarray, among which 245 proteins showed >1.5-fold change in expression level. In addition, expression levels of 24 proteins amongst the 245 proteins were significantly different (P<0.05) between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa independent of cancer stage, which were confirmed in the validation set. Subsequent immunohistochemistry (IHC) experiments validated that S100 calcium-binding protein A9 (S100A9), annexin A3 (ANXA3), nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), carboxylesterase 2 (CES2) and calcium activated chloride channel A1 (CLCA1) were differentially expressed between paired CRC and adjacent normal samples (P<0.05). Besides, using western blotting, we observed that expression level of ANXA3 increased stepwise in normal colorectal mucosa, adenoma and CRC tissues.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Differential protein expression profiling with iTRAQ-MS
        iTRAQ-MS was used to screen and identify proteins expressed differently between paired CRC and adjacent normal colonic mucosa from 24 patients (Table 1). The median age of the patients was 62.8 years old and 75% were male. Five pooled-samples (stage I, stage II, stage III, stage IV and adjacent normal sample) were obtained and labeled with one of the iTRAQ tags 113, 114, 116, 115, and 117, respectively.
        
          Table 1a
          
            Characteristics of tissue samples
          
          
            
              
                Samples application
                iTRAQ-MS
                Gene microarray
                Immunohistochemistry
              
              
                Median age (years old)
                62.8
                60.2
                62.0
              
            
            
              
                Sex
                Male
                18
                30
                9
              
              
                
                Female
                6
                22
                9
              
              
                TNM stage
                I
                6
                4
                2
              
              
                
                II
                6
                17
                6
              
              
                
                III
                6
                27
                9
              
              
                
                IV
                6
                4
                1
              
              
                Differentiation
                High
                1
                18
                3
              
              
                
                Moderate
                20
                23
                14
              
              
                
                Low
                3
                11
                1
              
              
                Total
                
                24
                52
                18
              
            
          
        
        
          Table 1b
          
            Characteristics of serum samples
          
          
            
              
                Groups
                Median age (years old)
                Sex
                TNM stage
              
              
                Male
                Female
                I
                II
                III
                IV
              
            
            
              
                Colorectal cancer patients
                61
                59
                41
                12
                38
                25
                25
              
              
                Healthy controls
                50
                39
                37
                -
                -
                -
                -
              
            
          
        
        In total, 5469 proteins were detected with iTRAQ-MS, including 3104 proteins that had quantitative data. Moreover, 3083 proteins had corresponding expressed genes, which would be elaborated below. By comparing CRC and paired adjacent normal mucosa, there were 836 proteins which showed >1.5-fold change in expression level. In addition, 245 of the 836 proteins had corresponding genes with expression change >1.5-fold. And the regulation directions of 245 proteins were in accordance with their genes thus became our key study objects (Figure 1). Then we conducted hierarchical cluster analysis of the 245 proteins that provided an overall assessment of differential protein expression profile between CRC and adjacent normal mucosa (Figure 2).
        
          Figure 1
          
            The numbers of differential proteins detected by iTRAQ-MS and genes by gene microarray
            The blue circles represent proteins identified by iTRAQ-MS, the red circles represent genes identified bygene microarray, and the intersections between blue and red circles contain proteins and their corresponding genes. Abbreviations: MS, mass spectrometry; FC, fold change.
          
          
        
        
          Figure 2
          
            Hierarchical clustering of the 245 proteins/genes expressed significantly different between CRC and normal mucosa
            Colored scale represents expression ratios between CRC and normal mucosa. Red shades indicate proteins/genes with increased expression, blue shades suggest proteins/genes with reduced expression, and yellow shades indicate minor changes in expression between paired samples. A. Hierarchical clustering of the 245 genes expressed significantly different among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. B. Hierarchical clustering of the 245 proteins expressed significantly different among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. Abbreviation: N, normal colonic mucosa.
          
          
        
        Expression levels of 24 proteins (Table 2) amongst the 245 proteins were significantly different (p<0.05) between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa independent of cancer stage, which were confirmed in the validation set. Furthermore, compared with paired adjacent normal tissue, 4 proteins were up regulated in CRC, while 20 proteins were down regulated in CRC, so it was with their genes (Figure 3).
        
          Table 2
          
            Information of the final selected 24 proteins and their genes
          
          
            
              
                SPN
                Gene
                Peptides (95%)
                Protein express ratio(Ca/N)
                Gene express ratio(Ca/N)
                Protein express ratio validation(Ca/N)
              
            
            
              
                P06702
                
                  S100A9
                
                24
                16.98204
                2.754885
                5.248075
              
              
                P05109
                S100A8
                21
                14.78627
                2.849887
                4.130475
              
              
                P12429
                
                  ANXA3
                
                28
                7.751251
                2.700335
                3.311311
              
              
                P43490
                
                  NAMPT
                
                14
                4.844349
                2.195813
                3.280953
              
              
                P49748
                
                  ACADVL
                
                33
                0.561375
                0.485372
                0.809096
              
              
                P02787
                TF
                58
                0.473676
                0.52579
                0.337287
              
              
                Q12864
                
                  CDH17
                
                37
                0.45606
                0.565975
                0.613762
              
              
                P00915
                CA1
                39
                0.382251
                0.259204
                0.30479
              
              
                Q99798
                ACO2
                41
                0.336688
                0.515983
                0.559758
              
              
                O60701
                UGDH
                28
                0.328707
                0.383307
                0.275423
              
              
                O00748
                
                  CES2
                
                16
                0.325962
                0.365841
                0.222843
              
              
                P34913
                EPHX2
                16
                0.294428
                0.282338
                0.515229
              
              
                P00352
                
                  ALDH1A1
                
                30
                0.293038
                0.658422
                0.159956
              
              
                Q16851
                UGP2
                22
                0.291184
                0.339332
                0.440555
              
              
                Q9NR45
                NANS
                18
                0.271187
                0.248097
                0.937562
              
              
                O60218
                AKR1B10
                8
                0.262586
                0.177446
                0.148594
              
              
                O75363
                BCAS1
                11
                0.24494
                0.504075
                0.319154
              
              
                Q0VD83
                APOBR
                28
                0.214114
                0.43405
                0.30479
              
              
                P04066
                FUCA1
                10
                0.209095
                0.550799
                0.15417
              
              
                A8K7I4
                
                  CLCA1
                
                52
                0.194405
                0.226036
                0.376704
              
              
                P07148
                FABP1
                52
                0.154667
                0.279866
                0.636796
              
              
                Q09666
                AHNAK
                276
                0.1536
                0.608789
                0.275423
              
              
                Q99795
                GPA33
                6
                0.136646
                0.367101
                0.325087
              
              
                P00918
                CA2
                19
                0.136464
                0.098199
                0.272898
              
            
          
          
            Abbreviations: N, normal colonic mucosa; Ca, colorectal cancer.
          
        
        
          Figure 3
          
            Relative ratios of 24 significantly differential proteins/genes amongst the 245 proteins/genes between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa independent of cancer stage
            A. Relative ratios of 20 down-regulated proteins among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. B. Relative ratios of 20 down-regulated genes among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. C. Relative ratios of 4 up-regulated proteins among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. D. Relative ratios of 4 up-regulated genes among four stages of CRC and normal mucosa. Abbreviation: N, normal colonic mucosa.
          
          
        
      
      
        Differential gene expression microarray analysis
        We applied Affymetrix U133plus2.0 microarrays to detect differentially expressed genes between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa from another 52 patients (Table 1). The median age of the patients was 60.2 years old and about 57.7% were male.
        In total, 39859 genes were identified in CRC and paired adjacent normal tissues, with 3083 genes having corresponding expressed proteins. Among the 3083 genes, there were 782 genes with expression level >1.5-fold change. As mentioned above, 245 of the 782 genes had corresponding proteins expressing differently by >1.5-fold and these genes had same regulation directions as their proteins did (Figure 1). Hierarchical cluster analysis of the 245 genes provided an overall assessment of differential gene expression profile between CRC and adjacent normal mucosa (Figure 2).
      
      
        Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the 245 differential proteins
        To obtain a broad assessment of biological functions and cellular components of the 245 differential proteins, we performed gene ontology enrichment analysis using DAVID v6.7 Functional Annotation Clustering tools (enrichment score>1.3 or p<0.05, Figure 4). In general, the main biological processes in which up- and down-regulated proteins in CRC participated were metabolic process and response to stress. Up-regulated proteins were more involved in cell adhesion and motion, while down-regulated proteins were more associated with oxidation reduction reaction and catabolic process. As for molecular functions, a majority of up-regulated proteins clustered in protein binding. With regard to cellular components, both up- and down-regulated proteins were mainly located in cytoplasm. Additionally, up-regulated proteins were more likely to be located in nucleus and vesicles than down-regulated proteins.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Gene ontology enrichment analyses for biological process, molecular function and cellular component of the 245 differential proteins (enrichment score>1.3)
          
          
        
      
      
        Verification of colorectal cancer potential biomarkers
        To verify iTRAQ-MS data, we conducted IHC of 8 differential proteins in 18 paired samples, namely S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, ACADVL, CDH17, CES2, ALDH1A1 and CLCA1. Staining scores of 5 proteins (S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, CES2 and CLCA1) were significantly different between CRC and normal tissues (p<0.05, Table 3). In accordance with iTRAQ-MS results, S100A9, ANXA3 and NAMPT were up regulated in CRC, while CES2 and CLCA1 were down regulated in CRC. Figure 5 illustrated cellular localization of these five proteins.
        
          Table 3
          
            Results of immunohistochemistry
          
          
            
              
                Proteins
                Adjacent normal tissue
                Cancer
                p*
              
              
                Positive
                Negative
                Positive
                Negative
              
            
            
              
                S100A9
                0
                18
                11
                7
                <0.0001
              
              
                ANXA3
                7
                11
                16
                2
                0.004
              
              
                NAMPT
                1
                17
                14
                4
                <0.0001
              
              
                ACADVL
                11
                7
                8
                10
                0.250
              
              
                CDH17
                17
                1
                12
                6
                0.063
              
              
                CES2
                17
                1
                5
                13
                <0.0001
              
              
                ALDH1A1
                9
                9
                5
                13
                0.125
              
              
                CLCA1
                17
                1
                2
                16
                <0.0001
              
            
          
          
            
              *
              paired chi-square test.
            
          
        
        
          Figure 5
          
            Immunohistochemistry images of S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, CES2 and CLCA1
          
          
        
        Further validation was performed by western blot analysis of 3 representative proteins (i.e. ACO2, CES2 and ANXA3), using paired CRC, adenoma and normal fresh-frozen tissues of 3 patients (Table 4, Figure 6). The relative proteins abundances of normal tissues were not significantly different than cancer tissues because of limited sample size. However, the change tendencies of protein abundances in normal and paired CRC tissues were consistent with iTRAQ-MS ratios. Moreover, we observed that expression level of ANXA3 escalated in normal colorectal mucosa, adenoma and CRC tissues (Table 4, Figure 6B).
        
          Table 4
          
            Relative protein abundance of western blot analysis
          
          
            
              
                
                Normal tissue (mean±SD)
                Adenoma (mean±SD)
                Cancer (mean±SD)
                p* (normal vs adenoma)
                p* (normal vs cancer)
              
            
            
              
                ACO2/β-actin
                0.95±0.20
                1.20±0.05
                0.85±0.25
                0.149
                0.569
              
              
                CES2/β-actin
                1.47±0.30
                0.48±0.18
                1.05±0.36
                0.006
                0.129
              
              
                ANXA3/β-actin
                0.55±0.58
                1.05±0.39
                1.39±0.24
                0.199
                0.052
              
            
          
          
            Abbreviations: SD, standard deviation.
            
              *
              One-way ANOVA.
            
          
        
        
          Figure 6
          
            Western blot analysis of ACO2, CES2 and ANXA3
            A. Western blot images of ACO2, CES2 and ANXA3. β-actin was used as loading control. B. Relative protein abundances determined by western blot (Mean±standard deviation). Abbreviations: N, normal colonic mucosa; A, adenoma; C, colorectal cancer.
          
          
        
        In addition, ELISA experiments were performed using serum samples of 100 CRC patients and 76 healthy controls. The results revealed that serum levels of S100A9 and ANXA3 in CRC patients were significantly higher than healthy controls (S100A9, 115.68±67.76 vs 74.84±42.11ng/mL, p<0.0001, Figure 7A; ANXA3, 0.71±0.41 vs 0.36±0.35ng/mL, p<0.0001, Figure 7B). Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn to evaluate the diagnostic value of ANXA3 and S100A9 for CRC. Area under curve (AUC) of ROC curve was measured and showed good prediction value (ANXA3, AUC=0.769, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.698-0.840, p<0.0001, Figure 7C; S100A9, AUC=0.690, 95% CI=0.613-0.767, p<0.0001, Figure 7D; ANXA3 combined with S100A9, AUC=0.788, 95% CI=0.720-0.857, p<0.0001, Figure 7E).
        
          Figure 7
          
            Serum ELISA results of S100A9 and ANXA3 in CRC patients and healthy controls
            A. Serum level of S100A9 in CRC was significantly higher than healthy controls (115.68±67.76 vs 74.84±42.11ng/mL, p<0.0001). B. Serum level of ANXA3 in CRC was significantly higher than healthy controls (0.71±0.41 vs 0.36±0.35ng/mL, p<0.0001). C. ROC curve of ANXA3 for CRC diagnosis (AUC=0.769, 95% CI=0.698-0.840, p<0.0001). D. ROC curve of S100A9 for CRC diagnosis (AUC=0.690, 95% CI=0.613-0.767, p<0.0001). E. ROC curve of ANXA3 combined with S100A9 for CRC diagnosis (AUC=0.788, 95% CI=0.720-0.857, p<0.0001). Abbreviations: ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; S100A9, S100 calcium-binding protein A9; ANXA3, annexin A3; CRC, colorectal cancer; ROC, receiver operator characteristic; AUC, area under curve; CI, confidence interval.
          
          
        
      
      
        Inhibition of ANXA3 suppressed cell proliferation and aggressiveness
        ANXA3-shRNA plasmid was transfected into SW620 cells to inhibit ANXA3 gene expression, obtaining transfectants named as SW620-ANXA3-shRNA. Meanwhile, a non-targeting plasmid was transfected in the same way as a negative control (SW620-NC).
        Cell proliferation was evaluated by CCK-8 experiment. The results revealed that from day 4 to day 7, the mean absorbance of SW620-ANXA3-shRNA was significantly lower than SW620-NC. Cell growth curves indicated that inhibition of ANXA3 expression could significantly suppress SW620 cell proliferation (Figure 8A).
        
          Figure 8
          
            Inhibition of ANXA3 could suppress CRC cell proliferation and aggressiveness
            A. Cell growth curves revealed that from day 4 to day 7, the mean absorbance of SW620-ANXA3-shRNA was significantly lower than SW620-NC. B. The mean number of migrated SW620-ANXA3-shRNA cells in one visual field at a magnification of 200× was significantly fewer than SW620-NC (5.7±0.6 vs 18.7±2.5, p=0.001). C. The mean number of invaded SW620-ANXA3-shRNA cells in one visual field at a magnification of 200× was significantly fewer than SW620-NC (6.3±1.2 vs 14.3±1.2, p=0.001). Abbreviations: ANXA3, annexin A3; CRC, colorectal cancer; shRNA, small hairpin ribonucleic acid; NC, negative control. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001.
          
          
        
        Transwell chamber was applied to evaluate cell migration and invasion abilities. We found that both migrated and invaded SW620-ANXA3-shRNA cells were significantly fewer than SW620-NC cells (mean number of migrated cells in one visual field at a magnification of 200×, 5.7±0.6 vs 18.7±2.5, p=0.001, Figure 8B; mean number of invaded cells in one visual field at a magnification of 200×, 6.3±1.2 vs 14.3±1.2, p=0.001, Figure 8C). Thus, we could conclude that inhibition of ANXA3 could reduce cell migration and invasion.
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      In conclusion, iTRAQ-MS integrated with gene microarray of matched CRC and normal tissues identified over 3000 expressed proteins/genes, including 245 differentially expressed proteins that had same regulation directions as their corresponding genes. Gene ontology enrichment analysis showed that, unlike down-regulated proteins, up-regulated proteins were more involved in cell adhesion and motion. Besides, up-regulated proteins were more likely to be located in nucleus and vesicles. The final selected 24 proteins and their genes were expressed differently with statistical significance between paired CRC and adjacent normal mucosa independent of cancer stage, which were confirmed in the validation set. Further verification experiments with IHC confirmed differential expression levels of 5 proteins (S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, CES2 and CLCA1) between CRC and normal tissues. ELISA experiments validated diagnostic value of S100A9 and ANXA3. Cell experiments showed that inhibition of ANXA3 could suppress CRC cell proliferation and aggressiveness. In summary, our results suggested potential values of S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, CES2 and CLCA1 as biomarkers of CRC. Furthermore, ANXA3 was probably associated with CRC cell proliferation and aggressiveness.
      S100A9, also known as calgranulin B, is a member of S100 protein family. As a calcium- and zinc-binding protein, S100A9 plays an important role in immune suppression of cancer. Previous studies have shown that, over-expression of S100A9 in tumor stroma can inhibit the differentiation of dendritic cells and macrophages and induce accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells, thus is partly responsible for immune defects in cancer [9, 10]. Likewise, we observed that S100A9 were over expressed in CRC mesenchymal tissue.
      ANXA3, a member of annexin family, is a calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein. Studies have demonstrated that ANXA3 is a potential biomarker for carcinogenesis, metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy in many cancers such as ovarian cancer [11], gastric cancer [12], breast cancer [13, 14] and liver carcinoma [15, 16]. But there is hardly any investigation of its role in CRC. Our results suggested that ANXA3 abundance increased stepwise in normal colorectal mucosa, adenoma and CRC tissues, indicating it being a candidate biomarker of colorectal carcinogenesis. Further in vitro experiments showed that inhibition of ANXA3 with shRNA plasmid could reduce CRC cell proliferation and aggressiveness, which indicated that ANXA3 might be a valuable therapeutic target of CRC. Further comprehensive study is expected.
      NAMPT, also known as pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor 1 (PBEF1) or visfatin, is an enzyme belonging to the family of glycosyltransferases. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), one of the key metabolites needed for cell survival, has three main generating pathways including two salvage pathways. Compared to normal cells, tumor cells are more dependent on primary salvage pathway [17]. As the rate-limiting enzyme in primary salvage pathway, NAMPT expression level can greatly influence NAD metabolism and NAD dependent cellular processes in tumor cells [18]. Over-expression of NAMPT has been observed in many malignancies including colorectal, ovarian, breast, et al [19]. To date, a number of novel and potent inhibitors targeting NAMPT have been synthesized that have shown anti-tumor efficacy in tumor models in vitro and in vivo [20].
      CES2, a member of alpha/beta fold hydrolase family, is an enzyme responsible for the hydrolysis of ester- and amide-bond-containing drugs. Its specific functions have not been elucidated yet. Studies have shown that some anti-cancer drugs such as 5-FU can induce CES2 expression and enhance cell-killing activity [21, 22]. We observed reduced expression of CES2 in CRC tissues compared to matched normal mucosa, which indicated that CES2 might be a negative biomarker of CRC risk.
      CLCA1 belongs to the calcium sensitive chloride conductance protein family. Researchers have observed significantly lower expression of CLCA1 in colorectal cancer tissues compared with normal tissues. And low level of CLCA1 in CRC might predict disease relapse and poor prognosis [23, 24]. Our results were in concordance with previous studies. But the molecular mechanism how CLCA1 influences cancer cell proliferation and differentiation is still unknown.
      Our study integrated high-throughput proteomics with genomics to identify candidate biomarkers of CRC. To our knowledge, except for our research, there has been only one study applying integrative proteomics with genomics to determine proteogenomic characterization of CRC so far [25]. Zhang and his colleagues conducted a study to perform integrated proteogenomic analyses of CRC, and identified five major proteomic subtypes that associated with clinical features [22]. With regard to our study, results of proteomics were highly consistent with that of genomics, showing 245 significantly differential proteins between CRC and paired normal mucosa. Further verification experiments with tissues indicated five proteins (S100A9, ANXA3, NAMPT, CES2 and CLCA1) to be potential biomarkers of CRC. But limitations such as small sample sizes and lack of experiments with body fluid existed in our study. Further large-scale prospective researches are warranted.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Samples and patient characteristics
        Paired CRC and adjacent normal tissues were surgically collected from 94 patients admitted in the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine between 2004 and 2014 (Table 1a). Among the 94 paired samples, 76 pairs were fresh tissues and stored in refrigerator at −80°C, and 18 pairs were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Twenty-four pairs of all fresh frozen tissues were used for iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS, the remaining 52 pairs of fresh frozen tissues for gene microarray, while 18 pairs of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were applied for IHC. Besides, 3 samples among the 24 fresh frozen tissues used for iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS were also applied to perform western blot analysis, as well as their matched adenoma tissues. Table 1 listed patients' clinical characteristics of tissue samples.
        Serum samples were collected and frozen at −80°C from 76 healthy controls and 100 CRC patients before treatment. The patients were admitted in the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine between 2015 and 2016. All the serum samples were used for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Table 1b listed clinical characteristics of serum samples.
        Written informed consents were obtained from all patients and Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine approved this study.
      
      
        iTRAQ labeling of tissue extracts
        Thawed tissues (24 CRC and 24 paired adjacent normal samples) were disrupted with ice-cold tissue protein lysis buffer (T-PER Reagent, added with phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail, Pierce, USA) in a glass homogenizor. Then tissue homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 5 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were collected and detected protein concentration by a BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Equal amounts of proteins from 6 stage I CRC samples were pooled to one pooled-sample. Proteins from 6 stage II, 6 stage III, 6 stage IV and 24 adjacent normal samples were also pooled to one pooled-sample respectively. Each pooled-sample supernatant with 100 μg proteins were precipitated, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The five pooled-samples were labeled with one of the iTRAQ tags 113, 114, 116, 115, and 117, respectively with iTRAQ reagent kit (Applied Biosystems, CA). The 5 labeled samples were mixed, desalted with a Sep-Pak Vac C18 column (Waters, USA) and dried in a vacuum freeze dryer.
      
      
        Reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) and MS/MS analysis
        Dried samples were analyzed with a strong cation exchanger (SCX) liquid chromatography column. SCX fractionation was performed using a linear binary gradient of 2–25% buffer B (25% acetone (ACN), 10 mM KH2PO4, 350mM KCl, pH 2.6) in buffer A (25% ACN, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.6) at a flow rate of 200 uL/min to separate the mixed iTRAQ-labeled samples into 10 fractions. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient formed by 5% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase A) and 95% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase B), from 5 to 40 of mobile phase B in 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400–1500 m/z in high resolution mode (> 30 000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 15 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 20 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution > 15 000) with rolling collision energy on and iTRAQ reagent collision energy adjustment on.
      
      
        Mass spectrometry data analysis
        Protein identification was carried out using Protein Pilot 4.2 beta (ABSciex USA). The Paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot software served as the default search program with trypsin as the digestion agent and MMTS as a fixed modification of cysteine. Biological modifications were programmed in the algorithm. Each MS/MS spectrum was searched in the SWISSPROT database for Homo sapiens. Proteins were identified with Global FDR less than 5%.
      
      
        Gene microarray analysis
        All samples were concurrently analyzed using Affymetrix U133plus2.0 microarrays. The extraction of RNA was performed following standard protocols provided by the manufacturers. For gene expression analysis, tumor and adjacent normal tissues were investigated using an Affymetrix U133plus2.0 microarray. Data were Acquired by GeneChip® Operating SoftwareVersion1.4. After quality checks, raw intensity data were Processed by quantile normalization with Robust Multi-Anlysis (RMA) to remove systematic bias using Affymetrix Expression Console Version 1.12.
      
      
        Proteomics data and gene expression data integration
        MS protein quantification data and mRNA microarrays probe sets were annotated to gene symbols respectively. When multiple probe sets were mapped to a single gene symbols ID, the arithmetic mean of the all normalized probe sets was used for correlation computation. The proteins' fold change in CRC was calculated by mean values of fold changes in all the four stages of CRC.
      
      
        Western blotting
        One-dimensional western blot analyses were performed utilizing standard procedures. Briefly, 10 μg of proteins were loaded and separated by standard 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Then proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes by electroblotting and probed with specific antibodies against ANXA3 (1:800, Abcam, ab33068), CES2 (1:1000, Abcam, ab184957), aconitase 2 (ACO2, 1:1000, Abcam, ab12910) andβ-actin(1:10000, HuaAn Biotechnology, M1210-2). Immunoreactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence using corresponding horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies and enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection reagents.
      
      
        IHC and semi-quantitative analysis
        The avidin–biotin–peroxidase complex method was used for immunostaining. In brief, paraffin-embedded blocks were sectioned at about 5μm thickness. Slides were baked at 60°C overnight, deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated using graded ethanol series. After antigen retrieval process, the tissue slides were treated with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 min to quench endogenous peroxidase activity. After 15 min of preincubation in 10% normal goat serum to prevent nonspecific staining, the sections were incubated with the diluted primary antibody at 37°C for 2 h, followed sequentially by peroxidase-polymer labeled rabbit anti-mouse secondary antibody. Then sites of peroxidase activity were demonstrated with diaminobenzidine. Finally sections were counterstained with hematoxylin and differentiated in hydrochloric acid alcohol, followed by dehydrated and mounted.
        Primary antibodies used in IHC analysis included S100A9 (1:1000, Abcam, ab92507), ANXA3(1:150, Abcam, ab33068), NAMPT (1:250, Abcam, ab109210), acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, very long chain (ACADVL, 1:400, Abcam, ab155138), cadherin 17 (CDH17, 1:1000, Abcam, ab109220), CES2(1:500, Abcam, ab184957), acetaldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1, 1:100, Abcam, ab52492) and CLCA1(1:1000, Abcam, ab180851).
        Staining expression was assessed by two independent pathologists based on both intensity and distribution of positive cells. Staining intensity was graded as follows: 0=absent, 1=low, 2=moderate and 3=high. Staining distribution was determined by percentage of positive cells (0, <5% positive cells; 1, 5-25% positive cells; 2, 26-50% positive cells; 3, >50% positive cells). The two scores were added by each other and divided by 2 to obtain the final score, which was categorized as negative for score <2 and positive for score ≥2.
      
      
        ELISA
        Serum levels of selected proteins in CRC patients and healthy volunteers were evaluated using commercially available sandwich ELISA kit according to the manufacturers' protocol (S100A9, CUSABIO, CSB-E11834h; ANXA3, Cloud-Clone Corp., SEE786Hu). All the samples and standards were detected in duplicate.
      
      
        Cell culture and ANXA3-shRNA plasmid transfection
        SW620 cells were cultured in Leibovitz L-15 medium at 37°C in 5% CO2. Culture medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 100 U/mL penicillin and 100mg/mL streptomycin. ANXA3-small hairpin RNA (shRNA) plasmid was bought from Sangon Biotech and transfected into SW620 cells using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen). Meanwhile, a non-targeting plasmid was used as a negative control.
      
      
        Cell proliferation assay
        Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8, KeyGen) was used to measure cell proliferation. Assays were performed according to the manufacturers' protocol. Cell proliferation was measured by optimal density (OD) value of 450 nm. The mean and SD were calculated from 3 independent experiments.
      
      
        Cell migration and invasion assay
        Cell migration was evaluated using transwell chamber with an 8μm-pore filter membrane (Corning Inc.). About 2×105 Cells in serum-free medium were seeded in the upper chamber, while conditioned medium with 20% FBS was added to the lower chamber. The chambers were incubated for 48 hours in 37°C incubator. Non-migrated cells in the upper chamber were removed with cotton swabs, whereas migrated cells on the underside of filter membrane were fixed in 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde and stained with crystal violet. Cell invasion was evaluated using matrigel coated 8μm-pore transwell chamber (Corning Inc.). The procedures of cell invasion assay were identical to cell migration. The migrated/invaded cells were counted by light microscopy. The migration/invasion ability was measured by mean cell number of five visual fields at a magnification of 200×. The experiments were carried out in triplicate.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        SPSS Statistics 20.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used to perform statistical analysis. Statistical tests were two sided and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Chi-square test was applied to compare categorical variables. Two-tailed Student's t-test and one-way ANOVA were used to compare quantitative data.
      
    
  
        Breast cancer (BrCa) is the most frequent cancer type in women and a leading cause of cancer related deaths in the world. Despite the decrease in mortality due to better diagnostics and palliative care, there is a lack of prognostic markers of metastasis. Recently, the exploitation of liquid biopsies and in particular of the extracellular vesicles has shown promise in the identification of such prognostic markers. In this study we compared the proteomic content of exosomes derived from metastatic and non-metastatic human (MCF7 and MDA-MB-231) and mouse (67NR and 4T1) cell lines. We found significant differences not only in the amount of secreted exosomes but most importantly in the protein content of exosomes secreted from metastatic versus non-metastatic ones. We identified periostin as a protein that is enriched in exosomes secreted by metastatic cells and validated its presence in a pilot cohort of breast cancer patient samples with localized disease or lymph node (LN) metastasis.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Breast cancer is divided in four main clinical subtypes based on their molecular characteristics (luminal A, luminal B, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) enriched and basal like) [1, 2]. The detection of the disease in early pre-metastatic stages is very important for evaluating the progression of the disease, the therapeutic strategy and its efficacy. For the last decades there is a decrease in breast cancer mortality, which is mainly attributed to earlier detection and advancements in adjuvant therapy [3]. However, breast cancer remains a leading cancer-related death cause in women worldwide. Current prognostic factors in breast cancer include tumor characteristics such as tumor size, the status of axillary lymph nodes and grade, as well as immunohistochemistry-based tumor markers such as the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), the proliferation marker Ki67 and ERBB2 expression [2, 4–9].
      Exosomes are one type of actively secreted extracellular vesicles (EV). They are endosome-derived and their biogenesis and secretion are regulated mainly by ESCRT-dependent and sphingomyelin-dependent processes [10, 11]. Exosomes have been shown to play an important role in cell to cell communication as they contain a wide variety of active proteins, DNA, coding and non-coding RNAs [12–14]. In addition, exosomes secreted from tumor cells can induce chemo-resistance, influence metastatic and invasive potential as well as, tumor growth of recipient cells [15–20].
      In the past few years there is an increased interest in EV and exosomes in particular, as a source of biomarkers for a variety of diseases including cancer [21, 22]. It was recently shown that Glypican-1 that is found in circulating exosomes but not in circulating tumor cells, is a biomarker of absolute sensitivity and specificity for pancreatic cancer [23].
      In the breast cancer setting, several studies have been performed on profiling exosomes for breast cancer diagnostic markers [24]. Several proteomic studies have been performed on exosomes secreted from human breast cancer cell lines [16, 25]. They have found that exosomes from the highly metastatic cell line MDA-MB-231 cell have a distinct proteome compared to non-metastatic MCF7 cell line; MDA-MB-231 exosomes are enriched in extracellular matrix proteins and proteins related to metastasis and invasion.
      Periostin is a secreted protein involved in the adhesion of osteoblasts and it is upregulated in several cancer types (ovarian, non-small cell lung cancer and breast cancer) [26–28]. Periostin is a major component of ECM which is secreted from fibroblasts, highlighting its role in tumor microenvironment regulation [29]. Moreover, periostin is secreted from cancer cells and has the ability to promote their migration and enhance their invasiveness by interacting with integrins [30]. Importantly, this protein has been shown to correlate with increased tumor progression and worse long-term survival outcomes in specific subgroups of breast cancer patients [28, 31].
      In this study, we compared the molecular profile of exosomes derived from mouse and human, metastatic cell lines to non-metastatic ones. We found several differentially enriched proteins, many of which were identified in the human breast cancer cell derived exosomes. Notably, periostin was enriched in exosomes secreted from metastatic compared to non-metastatic cell lines and in plasma samples from patients with lymph node metastasis.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Characterization of exosomes secreted from 67NR and 4T1 cell lines
        Exosomes were isolated from the supernatants of 67NR and 4T1 cells cultured in exosome depleted medium. Representative images from transmission electron microscopy revealed differences between metastatic and non-metastatic exosomes (Figure 1A). Exosomes from 67NR cells appeared smaller than the 4T1 exosomes, which was confirmed by the Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) which revealed mean sizes of 89nm and 102nm, respectively (Figure 1A and 1B). Furthermore, NTA analysis showed that 4T1 cells secrete 3 to 4 times more particles than 67NR cells (Figure 1B). Western blot analysis revealed that the 4T1 exosomes are more enriched in the tetraspanin CD63, whereas there was no difference in the tumor susceptibility gene TSG101 (Figure 1C).
        
          Figure 1
          
            Characterization of extracellular vesicles secreted from non-metastatic mouse breast cancer cell line 67NR and metastatic mouse breast cancer cell line 4T1
            A. Electron microscopy of 4T1 and 67NR ultracentrifuged pellets revealed the characteristic shape and size of exosomes (n=1). B. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) of particles secreted from 67NR and 4T1 cell lines. The relative concentration of secreted particles (106 particles/ml), which obtained from Nanosight was normalized with mg of proteins of cell lysates (means +/− SD, n=3, 5×1 minute movies sequences were measured). C. Western blot analysis of lysates from 67NR and 4T1 cells and exosomes (15μg respectively) probed for a panel of exosomal markers (CD63 and TSG101) (n=2).
D. Flow cytometric analysis of the mean fluorescence analysis of sucrose gradient fractions, for CD81 and CD63 exosomal markers, from 4T1 and 67NR pellets, respectively (n=2, in triplicates). E. Western blot analysis of the sucrose gradient fractions from 4T1 and 67NR exosomes (15μg respectively), probed for TSG101, Alix and Rab5 (n=2).
          
          
        
        We performed sucrose density gradient on the isolated exosomes from 67NR and 4T1 cells (Figure 1D, 1E). For exosomes isolated from 67NR cells, both flow cytometric immunophenotyping and western blot analysis of the fractions for exosomal markers revealed that the 67NR had a higher concentration between the fractions 1.12-1.16 g/ml whereas the 4T1 exosomes had a broader distribution between the fractions 1.09 to 1.17 (Figure 1D, 1E). In summary, the isolated vesicles from 67NR and 4T1 cell lines have the characteristic morphology, express the characteristic protein markers and have the characteristic physical properties of exosomes.
      
      
        Exosomes from 4T1 cells can be uptaken and may influence the migration rate of recipient cells
        To examine the functionality of our isolated exosomes we investigated if exosomes from the highly metastatic cell line 4T1 could affect migration of non-metastatic 67NR cells. For that purpose, 67NR or 4T1 cells were plated in conditioned medium and incubated with PKH67-labeled 67NR or 4T1 exosomes for 1, 3 or 6 hours. Syngeneic unlabeled exosomes were used as negative control. The percentage of positive cells indicated that both 67NR and 4T1 exosomes are readily uptaken by 67NR and 4T1 cells (Supplementary Figure 1B and 1D). The highest level of positive cells was observed at 6 hours for both cell lines and there was a tendency for higher uptake of 4T1 than 67NR exosomes from both cell lines. In addition, 4T1 cells seem to uptake, higher amount of both type of exosomes investigated (67NR and 4T1), than 67NR cells (Supplementary Figure 1B and 1D).
        Finally in order to investigate the ability of exosomes from the highly metastatic cell line 4T1 to alter the migration rate of non-metastatic cells 67NR we performed a scratch assay (Supplementary Figure 2A and 2C). We found that 4T1 exosomes increased the migration potential of both 67NR and 4T1 cells (Supplementary Figure 2B and 2D).
      
      
        Proteomics and bioinformatics analysis of the 67NR and 4T1 exosomes
        Proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS of 67NR and 4T1 cell derived exosomes revealed 440 proteins, of which 130 were present only in the 67NR exosomes, 161 were found only in the 4T1 exosomes and 149 were common between these two types of exosomes (Supplementary Figure 3A and Supplementary Table 1). We found that 94 proteins were identified as unique in 67NR cells and 111 in 4T1 cells. The common proteins between 67NR cells and 67NR exosomes were 15 and the common proteins between 4T1 cells and exosomes were 9 (Supplementary Figure 3A).
        We then performed gene ontology analysis using the PANTHER software which revealed that the 4T1 exosomes are primarily enriched with proteins that are involved in cell adhesion and cell-matrix interactions (Supplementary Figure 3B). In the biological processes, there is an increase of exosomal 4T1 proteins that are involved in cell adhesion and cell-matrix interaction such as integrins, laminins and fibronectin. With regard to molecular functions of the exosomal proteins, we found an enrichment of proteins in 4T1 exosomes that have cell surface receptor activity such as extracellular matrix proteins (e.g. integrins), cell adhesion molecules (e.g. tetraspanins) and extracellular matrix linker proteins (e.g. laminins). The strongest evidence for the enrichment of extracellular matrix proteins is found in the analysis of cellular components. In this mode of analysis we found high levels of proteins participating in cell junctions and cell-extracellular matrix interactions (e.g. catenins, matrix metalloproteinases, periostin, laminins and integrins) (Supplementary Figure 3A). In summary, our proteomic analysis, showed that 4T1 exosomes were enriched in proteins related to cell migration and adhesion, functions closely related to cancer metastasis.
      
      
        Validation of selected proteins identified by proteomic analysis in 67NR and 4T1 exosomes
        We performed a hierarchical unsupervised clustering of proteins depicted as a heat map of proteins enriched in 67NR and 4T1 exosomes, and found significant differences in protein expression (Figure 2A, top 50 proteins presented). We quantified the abundance levels by using ANOVA pairwise comparisons and selected the proteins that show the biggest difference in abundance levels between the 67NR and 4T1 exosomes (Figure 2B). We then validated by western blotting the top 20 proteins which were revealed by proteomic and gene ontology analysis (Figure 2C). The proteins that were found to be more abundant in 4T1 exosomes in both proteomic analyses are β-Catenin and integrin-α2 and integrin-β1 (Figure 2B and 2C). Interestingly, we found an enrichement of periostin in 4T1 compared to 67NR exosomes (Figure 2C). Furthermore, we found that E-cadherin is expressed in both 4T1 cells and exosomes and N-cadherin is mainly expressed in 67NR cells (Figure 2C). Regarding Lysyl oxidase like enzymes, we found that LOXL4 was present in lower levels in 4T1 cells and exosomes than in 67NR cells and exosomes (Figure 2C). LOXL3 could only be detected in 67NR cells and exosomes (Figure 2B and 2C). In this study, the expression of glypican-1 was enriched in 4T1 exosomes and glypican-4 in 67NR exosomes (Figure 2C). The levels of V-ATPase were the same in both 67NR and 4T1 cell lines and in 4T1 exosomes the levels of V-ATPase were lower than in 67NR exosomes (Figure 2C). Finally, we did not detect syndecan-4 and vimentin in neither 67NR nor 4T1 exosomes and the enrichment was found to be equal in 67NR and 4T1 cells (Figure 2C). Programmed Cell death Interacting Protein (Alix) was used as an exosomal marker, as a control of the purity of exosomal isolation we used AIF and GAPDH as a loading control for the whole cell lysates (Figure 2C). Summarizing, we confirmed by western blot analysis, the differential proteomic content of 67NR and 4T1 exosomes, identifying β-catenin, integrin α2 and β1, periostin and E-Cadherin, as putative markers of metastasis in mouse mammary carcinoma cell lines.
        
          Figure 2
          
            Proteomic analysis of exosomes isolated from 67NR and 4T1 exosomes
            A. Heat map of hierarchical clustering of 50 proteins that were identified with the highest number of peptides, in 67NR and 4T1 exosomes. Red color is corresponding to relatively high abundance of proteins, green relatively low and black color represents equal expression of proteins. B. Quantification of proteins that were enriched in 4T1 exosomes (upper graph) and enriched in 67NR but found in low levels in 4T1 exosomes (lower graph). C. Validation of proteomics for 67NR and 4T1 exosomes: western blot analysis for 67NR and 4T1 cells and exosomes probed for the indicated proteins. GADPH used as loading control for the cells and AIF as a quality control for the exosome isolation. Equal amount of proteins (10-15μg) was loaded in each Western (n=2).
          
          
        
      
      
        Characterization of exosomes derived from human breast cancer cell lines
        Nanoparticle tracking analysis showed that MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 have the characteristic mean size of exosomes 108 and 106nm respectively with MCF-7 cells secreting more vesicles than the MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 3A). We examined the presence of ERα in these exosomes and we found ERα in MCF7 cells and exosomes in low levels and, as expected, not in MDA-MB-231 cells and exosomes (Figure 3B). Furthermore, we found the accumulated mutant p53 in MDA-MB-231 cells but not in exosomes (Figure 3B). Periostin and integrin-β1 were enriched in the MDA-MB-231-derived exosomes compared to the MCF7 ones (Figure 3B). β-catenin was expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells but not in their corresponding exosomes, whereas integrin α2 protein levels were similar in the exosomes secreted from metastatic (MDA-MB-231) and non-metastatic cell lines (MCF7) (Figure 3B). Regarding E- and N-Cadherin, we found that MCF7 cells express E-cadherin, whereas MDA-MB-231 cells do not, N-Cadherin levels are higher in MDA-MB-231 exosomes compared to MCF-7 (Figure 3B). CD81 and TSG101 were used as exosomal markers and they were detectable in both exosomes from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. CD81 was highly enriched in exosomes compared to their corresponding exosomes, whereas TSG101 was detectable in the cells and present in their corresponding exosomes (Figure 3B).
        
          Figure 3
          
            Validation of selected proteins in human breast cancer non-metastatic cell line MCF7 and highly metastatic cell line MDA-MB-231
            A. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) of particles secreted from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. The relative concentration of secreted particles (106 particles/ml), which obtained from Nanosight was normalized with mg of proteins of cell lysates (means +/− SD, n=3, 5×1 minutes movies sequences were measured). B. Western blot analysis of MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and exosomes, probed for the indicated proteins (n=2).
          
          
        
      
      
        Validation of selected biomarkers in patient samples
        We isolated exosomes from the plasma of breast cancer patients with localised disease or lymph-node metastasis and/or metastasis to other sites (Figure 4A). We used Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis and we found that exosomes from patients with lymph-node metastasis have a bigger, average size (125 nm) and higher relative concentration (10.9×109 particles/ml of plasma) compared to exosomes from patients with localised breast cancer (95nm and 8.35×109 particles/ml of plasma, respectively) (Figure 4A and Supplementary Figure 4).
        
          Figure 4
          
            Characterization and validation of exosomes isolated from patients with non-metastatic or metastatic breast cancer
            A. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) of particles isolated from patients' plasma with early or late metastatic breast cancer (means +/− SD, 3 patients with early disease and 3 patients with lymph node metastasis, n=1). B. Immuno-EM of exosomes isolated from patient samples, for the indicated proteins. (Scale bar: 100nm) C. Western blot analysis of exosomes (15 μg) secreted from patients with non- or lymph node metastasis, probed for the indicated proteins (n=3).
          
          
        
        We further investigated the cell type of origin in our isolated exosomes from breast cancer patient samples by performing immuno-electron microscopy for Her2 and ERα which are well-known to be expressed in mammary epithelial cells. We found the presence of both of these proteins in a subset of the isolated vesicles (Figure 4B).
        We validated our in vitro findings in the extracellular vesicles isolated from the plasma of 14 breast cancer patients, 7 with localized disease and 7 with lymph node (LN) metastasis. We found that mainly periostin and N-Cadherin to a lesser extent were enriched in the extracellular vesicles isolated from the plasma of patients with LN metastasis (Figure 4C). We did not find significant differences for E-cadherin in the extracellular vesicles isolated from patients with LN-metastasis or localized disease (Figure 4C). We used CD9 as a marker for the presence of extracellular vesicles in our preparations (Figure 4C).
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      In this study, we employed the syngeneic breast cancer model, namely the 67NR and 4T1 mammary epithelial carcinoma cell lines to characterize their exosome molecular profile. We found that 67NR and 4T1 cell-derived exosomes have similar morphology with 4T1 exosomes having a bigger size than the 67NR ones (Figure 1A and 1B). Moreover, the higher exosomal secretion of 4T1 cells compared to 67NR cells, is in accordance with the belief that there is a gradient in exosome secretion from healthy to organ-defined tumor to metastatic cancer [32]. We profiled the molecular protein content and found significant differences. For example, CD63 expression was higher in 4T1 exosomes and had a distinct glycosylation pattern compared to the 67NR ones. CD63 is generally related with less invasiveness in many cancer types, the exception of breast cancer cells in which CD63 has been linked with increased invasiveness and drug resistance, which results from CD63 glycosylation and membrane localization [33, 34].
      LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of 67NR and 4T1 cell-derived exosomes revealed that 4T1 exosomes are enriched in proteins with functions related to migration (adhesion, cell junction and ECM proteins) Based on this analysis, we selected and validated by western blot the enrichement of proteins related to cell adhesion, cell-matrix interactions, integrins and cell-extracellular interactions, such as integrins, cadherins and periostin. Periostin is a secreted protein with a significant role in the adhesion of osteoblasts and has been found to be upregulated in several cancer types including breast cancer [26–28, 35]. Periostin has an important role in breast cancer as it maintains cancer stem cell properties and a potential drug target where periostin's interaction with integrins is disrupted [36, 37]. Interestingly, we found an accumulation of periostin in both 67NR and 4T1 exosomes that could suggest a potential role of these exosomes in the maintenance of cancer stem cell properties (Figure 2C).
      We also hypothesized that the exosome-enriched, migration-related proteins may be transferred to recipient cells with low metastatic potential and increase their migration propensity. Indeed we could demonstrate that the 4T1 exosomes could increase the rate of migration of 67NR cells. We also observed that the 4T1 exosomes are more readily uptaken by both 67NR and 4T1 cells. This enhanced uptake could be related to the enrichment of adhesion molecules identified by proteomic analysis in the 4T1 exosomes, leading to enhanced adhesion of these exosomes and subsequent uptake.
      An interesting and unexpected finding was that, the amount of exosomes and the enrichment of particular proteins in the exosomes secreted from the human cell lines was opposite to the results obtained in the mouse model. MCF-7 cells, the non-metastatic cell line secreted more particles compared to the MDA-MB-231 cells, as revealed by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (Figure 3A). We found the opposite observation in the mouse setting and we are not certain for the reason of this discrepancy. With regard to the molecular content, the expression pattern of integrin-β1 in the mouse and human cell lines is the same, as judged by western blotting, but for integrin-a2 we found no difference in the human setting compared to the strong enrichement identified in the 4T1 exosomes. Another protein that was enriched in metastatic mouse cell-derived exosomes was β-catenin, however we could not recapitulate these findings in the human cell line setting. Regarding E- and N-cadherin, we found that MCF7 express E-cadherin, whereas MDA-MB-231 do not, in alignment with the EMT phenotype. N-cadherin levels are very low in both cell lines, which in agreement with other studies [38, 39]. Interestingly, N-cadherin levels are higher in MDA-MB-231 exosomes compared to MCF-7.
      In an attempt to validate our findings in patient samples we used exosomes isolated from the plasma from breast cancer patients with localised disease or lymph-node metastasis, or from patients in which metastatic disease appeared later during follow up (Table 1). Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis, revealed that exosomes from patients with lymph-node metastasis have a bigger, average size and higher relative concentration compared to exosomes from patients with localised breast cancer (Figure 4A). This is in agreement with the findings form the mouse syngeneic cell lines where the highly metastatic cell line 4T1 secreted more particles than the non-metastatic cell line 67NR (Figure 1B). However, it is not in agreement with the data we obtained from our human model cell lines, further highlighting the difference between in vitro and ex vivo findings.
      
        Table 1
        
          Patients' characteristics from which exosomes were isolated from their plasma
        
        
          
            
              Patient
              Age at Diagnosis
              Tumor stage
              Nodal Metastasis
              Later Metastasis
              Grade
              ER status
              PGR status
              HER2
              Outcome
            
          
          
            
              
                1
              
              42
              T2
              −
              −
              T3
              +
              +
              +
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                2
              
              52
              T2
              −
              −
              T3
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                3
              
              54
              T1
              −
              −
              T2
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                4
              
              65
              T1
              −
              −
              T3
              −
              −
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                5
              
              49
              T2
              −
              −
              T2
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                6
              
              60
              T1
              −
              −
              T2
              +
              +
              +
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                7
              
              69
              T1
              −
              −
              T3
              −
              −
              +
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                8
              
              64
              T2
              +
              −
              T2
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                9
              
              46
              T2
              +
              −
              T1
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                10
              
              42
              T3
              +
              +
              T3
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                11
              
              56
              T1
              +
              −
              T2
              +
              +
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                12
              
              28
              T2
              +
              −
              T1
              +
              −
              −
              Relapse Free
            
            
              
                13
              
              42
              T1
              +
              +
              T2
              +
              +
              −
              Alive with Disease
            
            
              
                14
              
              55
              T2
              −
              +
              T3
              −
              −
              −
              Dead of Disease
            
          
        
      
      Concerning the validation of putative biomarkers in breast cancer patient samples, periostin was detected in higher levels in more samples from exosomes with metastatic breast cancer than in exosomes with non-metastatic breast cancer (Figure 4C). N-cadherin, E-cadherin and ERα were detectable in both categories of patients. These findings were expected since the isolated exosomes originated from all cell types of the patients and for example ERα is expressed physiologically from other cell types, apart from the tumour cells [40].
      In summary, periostin was found to be enriched in mouse and human breast cancer exosomes compared to their parental cells and in exosomes from patients with lymph node metastasis compared to exosomes from patients with localized disease. These data suggest that periostin could serve as biomarker for metastatic disease. Additional samples from a bigger cohort of patient samples should be analyzed in order to strengthen the clinical significance of these findings.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Ethical permissions and patient samples
        This study was approved by the local ethics committee. A written informed consent was signed by all patients for the collection of plasma samples at the time of breast cancer diagnosis. The patient samples we have are all primary breast cancer half of which were with N+ disease (primary breast cancer with lymph node metastasis at diagnosis) and patients that relapsed (metastasis) during the follow-up.
      
      
        Cell culture
        Murine mammary tumor cell line 67NR was purchased from Karmanos Cancer Institute, MI, USA and murine mammary tumor cell line 4T1 were provided by Dr. Janine Erler, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Human mammary tumor cell line MCF7 were provided from Dr. Jonas Berghs, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden and MDA-MB-231 cell line was provided by Dr. Massague, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA. All cell lines were cultured at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cell lines 67NR, MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (HyClone, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), 4T1 cell line was grown in RPMI-1640 medium. All were supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (GIBCO, Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), 2 mM L-glutamine (GIBCO, Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), 100U/ml penicillin with 100μg/ml streptomycin (GIBCO, Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK).
      
      
        Chemicals and antibodies
        For western blot, cells and exosomes were lysed in RIPA buffer adjusted to pH 7.4 (containing 50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% IGEPAL, 1% glycerol) with PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Schweiz), Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Schweiz), 100mM vanadate; prepared from Sodium Orthovanadate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). For protein analysis with MS cells and exosomes were lysed in 8M urea and diluted using AmBic. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
        For western blotting, primary antibodies against the following targets were used: TSG101 (Abcam, ab30871, Abcam Cambridge, MA), Alix (Cell Signalling, #2171, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), Rab5 (Cell Signalling #3547, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), CD63 (sc-15363, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA Cruz), b-catenin (Cell Signalling #8480, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), E-cadherin (BD 610181, BD BIOSCIENCES, NJ, USA), integrin-b1 (Cell Signalling #4706, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), integrin-a2 (Abcam, ab13357, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) LOXL3 and LOXL4 (sc-377216 and sc-66952 respectively, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), periostin (sc-67233, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), N-cadherin (BD 610920, BD BIOSCIENCES, NJ, USA), tetraspanin-14 (Acris, AP32800PU-N, San Diego, USA), V-ATPase (sc-28801, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), vimentin (Cell Signaling #5741, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), Glypican-1 (sc-365000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Glypican-4 (sc-247028, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Syndecan-4 (sc-15350, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), ERα (sc-8002, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), CD81 (sc-166028, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). For secondary antibody HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (Cell Signalling, #7074, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), anti-mouse (Cell Signalling #7076, Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) or anti-goat (sc-2020, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) were incubated and the protein bands were detected by western Lightning ECL or Plus-ECL (PerkinElmer, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and CL-XPosure Film (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
        PE-Conjugated antibodies (Biolegend, San Diego, CA) used for flow cytometry against 4 μm-sized latex beads (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK, Paisley, UK) were against CD63 and CD81 IgG Isotype Ctrl-PE (BioLegend, San Diego, CA) was used as control for CD81 and IgG2a, κ isotype Ctrl-PE was used as a control for CD63 and CD9.
      
      
        Exosome isolation
        Exosomes were isolated from cells cultured in conditioned medium, as previously described [14]. Briefly, for the depletion of exosomes from medium, 30% FBS medium was prepared and ultracentrifuged for 16 hours at 100,000g at 4°C. The supernatant was filtered into a vacuum-connected 0.22μm filter and diluted with medium supplemented with all the nutrients and antibiotics, in order to prepare the conditioned medium.
        Cells were cultured until they reached ~80% confluency and the supernatants were centrifuged at 100g for 10 minutes at room temperature to remove cell debris and filtered through a 0.22μm filter. Supernatants were frozen at −20°C and thawed at 4°C, then ultracentrifuged for 120 minutes at 120,000g at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed in phosphate buffered solution (PBS) and ultracentrifuged for 120 minutes at 120,000g at 4°C. Exosomes used for western blotting were resuspended in 1xRIPA lysis buffer whereas exosomes used for functional studies were resuspended in conditioned medium or PBS.
        For exosome isolation from patient plasma samples, whole blood was acquired and centrifuged (within one hour from blood sampling) at 1300g in 20 C for 10 min. The supernatant was centrifuge again at 2400g in 20 C for 15 min. The supernatant was stored in −20 C for max 2 weeks before moving to the −80 C freezer. Subsequently, 2 ml from each sample were used. The samples were gently mixed by two cycles of rotation for 2 minutes, at 4°C. Then, the samples were centrifuged for 20 seconds at 500g. The supernatant was diluted in PBS, until a final volume of 6 ml and centrifuged for 2 hours at 120,000g. From the resulting pellet, 40μl were kept and resuspended in PBS for secretion studies. For western blot, the pellet was lysed with 1xRIPA.
      
      
        Sucrose gradient
        Sucrose gradient ranging from 0.2 to 2 M sucrose was prepared as previously described [41]. Exosomes were placed on the surface of the sucrose gradient and ultracentrifuged at 120,000g at 4°C, for 20 hours. The fractions were collected and used for exosomal characterization; for western blotting and flow cytometry the fractions were ultracentrifuged at 120,000g for 2 hours, 4°C.
      
      
        Protein digestion
        10μg of extracted protein from each sample were dissolved in 0.1% ProteaseMax, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile. Resulting protein solutions were incubated for 30 minutes at 50°C followed by an additional bath soncication of 10 min at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged and directly subjected to a tryptic digestion protocol carried out by a liquid handling robot (MultiProbe II, Perkin Elmer). This included protein reduction in 5 mM DTT at 56°C and alkylation in 15 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:30 and digestion was carried out over night at 37°C.
      
      
        Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
        For each type of exosomes, 67NR and 4T1 two technical duplicates of pooled samples were used. Tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) and the resulting peptide mixture was injected into a nano-Ultimate system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using an in-house packed column (C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur®, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with the following gradient: 5−35% acetonitrile in 89 minutes, 48−80% ACN for 5 minutes and 80% ACN for 8 minutes all at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.
        The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full scan ranging from m/z 300 to m/z 1650 acquired with a resolution of R= 70,000 at m/z 400, followed by data-dependent HCD scans from maximum ten most intense precursor ions with a charge state ≥ 2. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of R=17,500, a target value of 2e5, isolation width was set to 4 and normalized collision energy to 26.
      
      
        Data analysis
        Tandem mass spectra were extracted using Raw2MGF (in-house developed software), and the resulting mascot generic files were searched against a SwissProt protein database (reversed protein sequences had been added to database for decoy search) using the Mascot 2.3.0 (Matrix Science Ltd.). Mascot was set up to search a concatenated SwissProt protein database (selected for Mus musculus) using trypsin and allowing for one missed cleavage sites. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications.
        Quantitative information was extracted using in-house developed software Quanti. This software performs extracted ion current quantification. For quantitative purposes only peptides identified with a Mascot Score higher than 18 were selected. Such a threshold was set to fulfill condition of no more than 1% of FDR over total peptide population. Only proteins with at least two peptides were considered for quantitation. The hierarchical clustering in Figure 2A was generated in Perseus (MaxQuant 2.4) and was done for row and column tree using the following parameters: euclidean distance, linkage method average and k-means preprocessing. The input data were the most abundant 50 proteins.
      
      
        Flow cytometry
        To detect surface exosomal markers in exosomes by flow cytometry, firstly exosomes were bound to latex beads (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Paisley, UK, A37304) and then stained with conjugated fluorescent antibodies. Briefly, 20μl of 4μm latex beads were washed with 1ml PBS twice and incubated with 5μg of purified exosomes or 100μl of each sucrose fraction for 30 minutes with gentle agitation, at room temperature. Next PBS was added to a final volume of 1ml, and incubated on a test tube rotator wheel overnight at 4°C. Then the beads were washed and resuspended in BCB blocking buffer and incubated for 30 minutes with gentle agitation at room temperature. The beads were then washed again, divided into several tubes and fluorescent conjugated antibodies diluted 1:50 in PBS, against CD63, and CD81 were added. The beads were incubated for 30 minutes, washed twice and ran on a FACS Calibur flow cytometer (BD biosciences, NJ, USA). The data were analyzed and quantified by using the softwares, CellQuest (BD BIOSCIENCES) and FlowJo (Treestar).
      
      
        Electron microscopy
        For exosome immunogold labeling for electron microscopy, exosomes were prepared and labeled according to the protocol of Thery et al [41]. In brief, isolated exosomes were resuspended in 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA), adsorbed unto nickel Formvar-carbon coated electron microscopy grids (200 mesh), blocked with PBS/5% (w/v) BSA and incubated with antibodies for Her-2 (MSK044, Zytomed Systems, Berlin, Germany), ERα (sc-8002, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and Glypican-1 (sc-101827, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) for 30 min. Subsequently grids were washed, blocked and incubated with Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG H&L 10nm Gold antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Grids were washed, fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde, contrasted with 4% uranyl acetate and finally embedded in a mixture of 4% uranyl acetate and 2% methyl cellulose.
        Grids were visualized on a Morgagni 268 Electron Microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) and photographed with the Morada Soft Imaging System (Olympus Corporation, Hamburg, Germany).
      
      
        Western blotting
        Cells and exosome pellets were lysed using 1xRIPA buffer (containing 50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% IGEPAL, 1% glycerol), supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Schweiz), PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Schweiz), 100mM vanadate (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Exosomes in PBS suspension were lysed using 4xRIPA but to a final concentration of 1XRIPA. Protein concentration was determined with Bradford assay using Bradford solution (Bio-rad). Equal amount of proteins (10-15μg) for each Western Blot, were boiled at 90°C for 5 min with LDS (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) and DTT. Proteins were separated in 10 or 12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) in 1xMES running buffer (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) containing anti-oxidant (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), according to manufacturer's instructions. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes (PerkinElmer, Santa Clara, CA, USA), in transfer buffer (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) containing 20% methanol. Membranes were blocked in 5% (w/v) non-fat milk in 1xTBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 for 1 hour in room temperature and then incubated with primary antibodies in the appropriate dilutions (1/500-1/1000) and incubated overnight at 4°C. HRP-conjugated antibodies in 1/2000 dilution were used as secondary antibodies and the membranes were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Washing steps between incubations with antibodies were performed with 1xTBS containing 0.1% Tween-20. ECL or ECL+ (PerkinElmer, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were used for the developing with X-ray film (CL-exposure Film, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
      
      
        Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)
        For the secretion study, NS500 (NanoSight Limited, London, UK) was used, equipped with an 8 mega pixel camera (Andor Technology, Tokyo, Japan) and a 405nm laser, in order to measure the size and determine concentration of exosomes. NTA v2.3.0.17 software (NanoSight Limited) was used for both data acquisition and analysis. Three samples from each exosome type were measured and their average was calculated. The duration of each video was 5×1 minutes. During the analysis procedure the camera level was 14 and the detection threshold was 7.
        For the patient samples analysis NTA v3.0 software was used. Three samples from node negative and four from node positive patients were used and their average was calculated. The camera level was set at 8 and the detection threshold was 7.
      
      
        Exosome PKH67 labeling
        4T1 exosomes were labelled with PKH67 green fluorescent (PKH67 Green Fluorescent Cell Linker Midi Kit for General Cell Membrane Labelling, #MIDI67, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, exosome pellets were labelled with 2.5 μM of PKH67 dye in 400 μl of diluent C for 5 minutes. Afterwards, blocking buffer (1% of bovine serum albumin) was added and incubated for 1 minute. Finally, exosomes were washed with PBS by ultracentrifugation at 120,000g, for 2 hours, 4°C. PKH67-labeled exosomes were then resuspended in 150μl PBS.
      
      
        Exosome uptake assay
        In 48 well plates, 8×104 or 5×104 cells/well were seeded from 67NR and 4T1 cells respectively, in conditioned medium, in a final volume of 400μl. After cells reached ~80% confluency 1.2μg/ml 67NR or 4T1 PKH67 labeled exosomes were added, in final volume 400μl and incubated for 1, 3 or 6 hours and cells were harvested, washed 3 times with 0,5% BSA in PBS and the percentage of green fluorescence intensity (of 10,000 gated events in the FSC/SSC dot plot) was measured by using the BD FACS LSRII flow cytometer (n=2 in triplicates). The results were analyzed by using the BD FACSDiva software (BD BIOSCIENCES, NJ, USA).
      
      
        Exosome uptake assay for fluorescent microscopy
        In 24-well plate glass coverslips were placed and 2×104 cells/well were seeded from 67NR or 4T1 cells, in conditioned medium, in final volume of 500μl. After 16 hours in 67NR cells 0.3μg/ml of PKH67 labeled exosomes were added, whereas in 4T1 cells, after 40 hours 0.48 μg/ml were added and incubated for 3 hours (the exosomes' concentration was adjusted according to ratio cells/exosomes in order to be consistent with the uptake experiment which was previously described). The images were captured on a DAS Leitz DM RB microscope with a Hamamatsu C4880 dual-mode cooled CCD camera and representative images were processed using Photoshop software (Adobe).
      
      
        Scratch assay
        In a 24 well plate, 7.5×104 67NR or 4T1 cells were seeded in conditioned media, in final volume of 500μl. After 16 hours, they were scratched with a 200μl pipette tip and 3μg/ml of 67NR or 4T1 exosomes were added. Photos from the scratched areas were taken in 0, 24, 48 hours for 67NR cells and in 0, 12, 24 hours for 4T1 cells, using a phase contrast microscope. Multiple digital images of the wound were captured at the indicated time points (0h, 12, 24h) after inducing the wound and the closure of the wound was calculated by using the distance measurement capabilities in the image-j software (NIH image, United States).
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLE
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        Hypoxia influences different cellular biological processes. To reveal the dynamics of hypoxia's effects on miRNA regulation in vivo, we examined the expression levels of all miRNAs in human brain and heart specimens from cases of mechanical asphyxia compared with those from cases of craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock. We further validated differently expressed miRNAs in another 84 human specimens and rat models. We found that mir-122 was significantly down-regulated and that its putative targets G6PC3, ALDOA and CS were increased in the brain and cardiac tissues in cases of mechanical asphyxia compared with craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock. Our data indicate that mir-122 and its targets G6PC3, ALDOA and CS play roles in the hypoxia responses that regulate glucose and energy metabolism and can serve as hypoxia biomarkers.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Hypoxia generally refers to insufficient oxygen supply to tissues that ranges from < 0.01% to 5%, and its duration can be chronic, acute or fluctuating. These variations may influence different cellular biological processes [1] such as the cell cycle [2], DNA damage repair [3] and mitochondrial metabolism [4]. For example, pO2 levels less than 10 to 15 mm Hg induce the expression of transcription factor HIF (hypoxia-inducible factor) and its downstream genes to maintain stable intracellular pH, glucose and angiogenesis levels. In addition, pO2 levels less than 10 mm Hg lead to decreases in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and protein syntheses to reduce oxygen consumption, whereas extremely low pO2 levels of less than 1 mm Hg may cause apoptosis and a metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis to maintain adequate ATP levels [5]. Thus, the processes by which cells sense and respond to ambient oxygen concentrations are complex, and the highly coordinated metabolic response is critical in regulating the downstream effectors, such as HIF family transcription factors [6] and microRNAs (miRNAs) [7].
      miRNAs are a class of small non-coding RNAs that regulate the stability and translation efficiency of their target mRNA by targeting the 3' untranslated region (UTR) [8, 9]. Emerging evidence indicates that miRNAs are involved in the metabolic regulation induced by hypoxia [10, 11]. And miRNA biogenesis is also influenced by hypoxia through HIF-dependent or HIF-independent transcriptional regulation [12].
      Most previous studies of hypoxia have heavily relied on cell cultures and animal models; in vivo investigations, especially in humans, are lacking. We reason that a hypoxia shock environment is created in the body in cases of death by mechanical asphyxia and that the brain and heart are the tissues that are most sensitive to hypoxia. We first employed a microarray approach to examine the expression levels of all miRNAs in human brain and heart specimens from three mechanical asphyxia cases using two craniocerebral injury cases and two hemorrhagic shock cases as controls. In total, we validated 55 differentially expressed miRNAs using RT-qPCR in 48 brain and 36 heart specimens. We ultimately selected mir-122, which was expressed at a significantly low level in the both brain and heart specimens from mechanical asphyxia cases. We also reported reversed expression patterns of three predicted mir-122 target genes, G6PC3, ALDOA and CS, which encode metabolic enzymes, in the corresponding human specimens. These findings were confirmed in a rat hypoxia model. Our data suggest that mir-122 and its putative downstream target genes, G6PC3, ALDOA and CS, could serve as biomarkers for mechanical asphyxia and shed light on the pathogenesis of hypoxia in diseases.
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        We identified 71 differentially expressed mRNAs in brain specimens and 138 in cardiac specimens using microarrays
        We hypothesized that hypoxic environments are created in the brain and heart immediately in mechanical asphyxia death and that alterations in miRNA expression levels may result. In this study, we detected the expression levels of the miRNAs in three mechanical asphyxia cases, two hemorrhagic shock cases and two craniocerebral injury cases using the Microarray 2.0 system. In total, 48 and 23 miRNAs differed in expression between the brain specimens of those who died of mechanical asphyxia compared with those who died from craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock, respectively. Among these miRNAs, 10 out of 48 and 10 out of 23 were up-regulated by more than 2-fold, and others were down-regulated in the brain specimens that underwent mechanical asphyxia (Figure 1A, 1B and Table 1). Using the same approach, 48 and 90 miRNAs were differentially expressed in heart specimens, respectively. Among these miRNAs, 44 of 48 and 73 of 90 were up-regulated by more than 2-fold, and others were down-regulated in the cardiac specimens (Figure 1C, 1D and Table 1). Furthermore, eight miRNAs (mir-31, mir-122, mir-219-2-3p, etc.) in the brain specimens and sixteen miRNAs (mir-192, mir-148a, mir-122, etc.) in the cardiac specimens exhibited consistent changes as a result of mechanical asphyxia death compared with the other two causes of death (Table 1).
        
          Table 1
          
            Number of miRNAs that changed in brain and heart of mechanical asphyxia compared to controls
          
          
            
              
                Specimens
                Mechanical asphyxia comparing with control
                Up/down-regulation
                No. of regulated miRNA(fold change >2)
                miRNAs regulated in both comparisons
              
            
            
              
                Brain
                Craniocerebral injury
                up
                10
                mir-31; mir-122; mir-219-2-3p mir-34c-5p; mir-338-5p; mir-338-3p; mir-574-3p; mir-584
              
              
                down
                38
              
              
                Hemorrhagic shock
                up
                10
              
              
                down
                13
              
              
                Heart
                Craniocerebral injury
                up
                44
                mir-192; mir-148a; mir-122; mir-194; mir-572; mir-885-5p; mir-940; mir-1202; mir-1299; mir-1246; mir-1281; mir-103; mir-1825; mir-1915; mir-3162; mir-3188
              
              
                down
                4
              
              
                Hemorrhagic shock
                up
                73
              
              
                down
                17
              
            
          
        
        
          Figure 1
          
            Microarray analyses of miRNA expression in human brain and heart specimens of three mechanical asphyxia cases, two craniocerebral injury cases and two hemorrhagic shock cases
            A. and B. Differentially expressed miRNA profiles of mechanical asphyxia cases compared with craniocerebral injury cases and hemorrhagic shock cases in human brain specimens; C. and D. Differentially expressed miRNA profiles of mechanical asphyxia cases compared with craniocerebral injury cases and hemorrhagic shock cases in human brain specimens. * = ENSG00000.
          
          
        
      
      
        RT-qPCR validation of microarray results and the robust reduction of mir-122 in mechanical asphyxia specimens
        We used U6 as a reference gene to determine that 55 of the abovementioned differentially expressed miRNAs exhibited greater changes via RT-qPCR and expanded our sample to 84 (48 brain and 36 cardiac) human specimens (Figure 2). We confirmed the expression changes (> 2-fold) of mir-184 and mir-1250 in brain and of mir-1281, mir-551b, mir-3185, mir-3162-5p and mir-1228 in heart in mechanical asphyxia cases (Figure 2A and 2C). Interestingly, we also noticed greater changes in several miRNAs (Figure 2B and 2C) in the brain or heart specimens of craniocerebral injury cases compared with hemorrhagic shock. The significance of these changes will be an interesting question for future investigations.
        
          Figure 2
          
            RT-qPCR detection of differentially expressed miRNA identified via microarray analyses in 48 human brain specimens and 36 human heart specimens from the indicated causes
            A. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in brain specimens; B. miRNAs up regulation in craniocerebral injury compared with the other two causes of death in brain specimens; C. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in heart specimens. MiRNA expression levels in mechanical asphyxia cases were normalized to 1, and the relative changes in the miRNA expression levels in craniocerebral injury cases and hemorrhagic shock cases were determined by comparisons with the expression levels in mechanical asphyxia cases.
          
          
        
        Further analysis of the RT-qPCR data from the 84 samples found that mir-122 was the most consistently down-regulated miRNA in response to mechanical asphyxia in both types of tissues comparing with the other two death causes. Specifically, 3.76- and 5.54-fold reductions in the mechanical asphyxia brain were noted compared with specimens from craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock cases, respectively (Figure 3A). Regarding cardiac tissues, 2.83- and 1.96-fold reductions, respectively, were noted in the mechanical asphyxia cases (Figure 3A). Importantly, significant correlations with postmortem interval, environmental temperature and age were not observed for mir-122 expression (Figure 3B and Figure 3C), further indicating that mir-122 down-regulation is likely caused by hypoxia shock in mechanical asphyxia death.
        
          Figure 3
          
            RT-qPCR validation of mir-122 expression in 48 human brain specimens, 36 heart specimens and 18 rats and analyses the relationships between the Ct values of mir-122 expression and postmortem of death, environmental temperature and age
            A. mir-122 down-regulation in both brain and cardiac tissues of human and rat from mechanical asphyxia cases compared with specimens from other cases. B. and C. Correlations between Ct values and postmortem interval (PMI), age and temperature in human brain samples and in human heart samples. P > 0.05 by the two-tailed t-test.
          
          
        
      
      
        The glycometabolism-related genes G6PC3, ALDOA, and CS are putative targets of mir-122
        To elucidate the downstream mechanism of down-regulated mir-122 expression, we sought to identify mir-122 targets. To improve the accuracy of miRNA binding site prediction, we used three target prediction algorithms: microrna.org [13], TargetScan [14] and MirTarBase [15]. Venny analyses [16] revealed 25 genes that might be regulated by mir-122 (Figure 4). Using Gene Ontology (GO) analysis [17, 18], we observed significant enrichment in glycometabolism pathways. We further narrowed our analysis to G6PC3 (glucose-6-phosphatase enzyme 3), ALDOA (fructose-1, 6-diphosphate aldolase A) and CS (citrate synthase), whose protein products are critical to glucose and energy metabolism (Table 2).
        
          Table 2
          
            Cluster of GO analysis of the 25 common predicted target genes
          
          
            
              
                Pathway
                P -value
                Enrichment score
                Cluster
              
            
            
              
                Hexose metabolic process
                2.7E-3
                2.15
                1
              
              
                Monosaccharide metabolic process
                4.0E-3
              
              
                Carbohydrate biosynthetic process
                1.1E-2
              
              
                Glucose metabolic process
                2.1E-2
              
              
                Phosphorus metabolic process
                1.2E-2
                1.29
                2
              
              
                Phosphate metabolic process
                1.2E-2
              
              
                Response to organic substance
                8.8E-2
              
              
                Phosphorylation
                1.1E-2
              
              
                Protein amino acid phosphorylation
                2.6E-1
              
              
                Regulation of phosphorylation
                1.5E-1
                0.81
                3
              
              
                Regulation of phosphorus metabolic process
                1.6E-1
              
              
                Regulation of phosphate metabolic process
                1.6E-1
              
              
                Response to organic substance
                8.8E-2
                0.62
                4
              
              
                Regulation of apoptosis
                3.4E-1
              
              
                Regulation of programmed cell death
                3.4E-1
              
              
                Regulation of cell death
                3.4E-1
              
              
                Regulation of transcription, DNA- dependent
                7.6E-1
                0.11
                5
              
              
                Regulation of transcription
                7.7E-1
              
              
                Regulation of RNA metabolic process
                7.7E-1
              
              
                Transcription
                8.4E-1
              
            
          
        
        
          Figure 4
          
            Venny analyses of mir-122 targets predicted by the microrna.org, TargetScan and MirTarBase databases
          
          
        
      
      
        Overexpression of putative mir-122 downstream targets: G6PC3, ALDOA, and CS
        It is generally accepted that miRNAs exert their function partly by down-regulating the expression of their target genes. We hypothesized that there are reverse correlations between mir-122 and G6PC3, ALDOA and CS mRNA levels. Indeed, we found that the mRNA levels of all three genes were significantly increased in the mechanical asphyxia specimens compared with the specimens from craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock using the same set of 48 brain and 36 cardiac specimens described above (Figure 5A and 5B). Consistently, mir-122 and protein level analyses from the three cause-of-death models in rats (n = 6) revealed the same trend (Figure 3A and Figure 5C). We further confirmed that mir-122 overexpression suppresses the expression of a luciferase reporter gene containing the putative wild-type but not the mutated mir-122 target sequence from CS 3'UTR in human 293T cells (Figure 5D). Evidence of G6PC3 and ALDOA as putative targets has been confirmed using luciferase reporter [19]. Our data coordinate with prevails studies indicating that mir-122 regulates the expression of the mRNAs and proteins related to G6PC3 [20], ALDOA [21] and CS [22] in cell cultures.
        
          Figure 5
          
            G6PC3, ALDOA and CS exhibited inverse correlations with mir-122 in specimens from the indicated causes of death and Dual luciferase reporter analysis of CS in 293T cells
            A. and B. Up-regulation of G6PC3, ALDOA and CS mRNA in human brain and heart specimens. C. Up-regulation of G6PC3, ALDOA and CS protein in rat brain and heart specimens. D. Dual luciferase reporter analysis of mir-122 and a reporter gene with predicted mir-122 target sequences (wildtype and mutant) in the CS 3'UTR in 293T cells.
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      Microarray analyses of brain and cardiac specimens from the seven human cases, which included three cases of death by mechanical asphyxia, two of death by craniocerebral injury and two of death by hemorrhagic shock, revealed 71 differentially expressed miRNAs in the brain and 138 in the heart. Further RT-qPCR validation of miRNAs in both organs in a larger sample size of 48 brain and 36 cardiac specimens with the same three causes of death found that several miRNAs were differentially expressed in the mechanical asphyxia specimens. Specifically, mir-122 expression was significantly reduced in the brains and cardiac tissues of mechanical asphyxia cases compared with the specimens from craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock cases. We also observed reversed expression patterns of the three predicted miR-122 targets, G6PC3, ALDOA and CS, which encode glycometabolic enzymes, in the corresponding specimens. These findings were validated in a rat hypoxia model, further confirming their biological relevance.
      Hypoxia occurs during and after death, and visceral organs such as the brain and heart will experience hypoxia regardless of cause of the death. In forensic science, the distinguishing feature of the death by mechanical asphyxia is the disruption of oxygen intake by force [23]. The body experiences a period of struggle, and the organism suffers from hypoxia longer and more intensely than in other cause of death. A hypoxia condition can induce the secretion of surfactant protein-A (SP-A). And an increase of SP-A in mechanical asphyxia cases demonstrates that hypoxia is the distinguishing feature of death in such cases [24]. In addition, Cecchi et al. have demonstrated that HIF-1a (hypoxia-induced factor 1-a), a target of mir-122 expressed in response to hypoxia, was up-regulated in mechanical asphyxia compared with craniocerebral injury, natural death and other causes of death [25, 26]. Our findings thus indicate that mir-122 reduction might be the response to hypoxia in mechanical asphyxia.
      We observed significantly increased G6PC3, ALDOA and CS expression accompanied by reductions in mir-122 expression in mechanical asphyxia specimens, indicating an elevated glucose demand under acute hypoxia conditions. Kyoungsub et al. found that mir-122 decreased and activated glycolytic metabolism with low ATP synthesis in hepatocellular carcinoma cancer stem cells in a hypoxia microenvironment [27]. Additionally, to compensate for the reduction in ATP production under hypoxic conditions, cancer cells can stimulate glucose uptake and metabolism by inducing GLUT3 and ALDOA [28, 29]. ALDOA is a glycolytic enzyme that can up-regulated by inhibiting mir-122 in the liver [21, 30]. Finally, Miranda et al. have demonstrated that mir-122 is down-regulated intracellularly with the excessive glucose spared from glycolysis going towards storage in breast cancer cells. They also found that mir-122 is up-regulated in cancer-secreted enclosed vesicles and transfers to normal cells to suppress CS expression and glucose utilization in these cells [22]. Furthermore, G6PC3 is a gluconeogenic enzyme that can be stimulated by mir-122 reduction to contribute to gluconeogenesis [20, 31]. All of these studies demonstrate that mir-122 is down-regulated in hypoxia and can stimulate intracellular glucose by up-regulating G6PC3 and ALDOA regardless of whether it is stimulated by glycolysis or by gluconeogenic factors. It also increases glucose utilization by up-regulating ALDOA and CS to sustain ATP production for cell life. In this study, the elevated expression of G6PC3, ALDOA and CS, which influence glucose and energy metabolism, may play important roles in the hypoxia response caused by mechanical asphyxia.
      Our findings indicate that an acute metabolic response to hypoxia occurs in human bodies in cases of mechanical asphyxia and is likely regulated by mir-122. As the first human report using specimens from cases of mechanical asphyxia, we anticipate that our findings will not only provide biomarkers for mechanical asphyxia but also shed light on the in vivo understanding of the pathogenesis of the many types of hypoxia involved in diseases.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Biological materials
        
          Human specimens
          Ethical approval for the use of human samples was obtained from the Science and Ethics Committee of Fudan University. We obtained 98 brain and cardiac samples from the Forensic Lab of the Shanghai Public Security Bureau with their written informed consent. All samples were assigned to one of three groups according to the cause of death: mechanical asphyxia, craniocerebral injury or hemorrhagic shock. The details of the samples are provided in Table 3.
          
            Table 3
            
              Information of human samples
            
            
              
                
                  Group
                  
                    n
                  
                  Average Age(y) at death
                  Average PMI(h)
                  Average temperature(°C) at death
                  Gender M/F
                
              
              
                
                  
                    Mechanical Asphyxia
                  
                  21
                  38
                  15
                  19
                  17/4
                
                
                  
                    brain trauma
                  
                  18
                  38
                  16
                  23
                  15/3
                
                
                  
                    Hemorrhagic Shock
                  
                  18
                  36
                  10
                  20
                  14/4
                
              
            
          
        
        
          Animal specimens
          Rats were purchased from the Department of Animal Science Laboratory of Fudan University. In total, 18 male Sprague-Dawley rats (body weight 220 ± 20 g) were randomly assigned to three groups (mechanical asphyxia, craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock) to collect the anterior region of the brain and the cardiac muscle of the apex cordis. All samples were placed in RNA Later solution (Takara, Japan) immediately after collection. The animal experiments described in the study were performed in accordance with the principles for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Science and Ethics Committee of Fudan University. In the mechanical asphyxia death group, a nylon rope (diameter 3 mm) was used to create a sliding loop that was fixed to the top of a bar, and the rats were placed in the loop, causing suffocation death based on their own gravity. In the craniocerebral injury death group, a 10-g weight fell freely from a 20-cm height within the vertical catheter and hit the dura. In the hemorrhagic shock death group, the bilateral carotid artery was isolated and cut to induce death via shock.
        
        
          RNA purification and reverse transcription
          Total RNA was extracted from the samples following the methods described by Ma et al. [32]. Briefly, cDNA was generated using a PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (Takara, Japan) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and 500 ng of total RNA was reverse transcribed by adding a polyA tail using a One-Step Prime-Script miRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara, Japan) according to the manufacturer's protocol for microRNA analysis. The cDNA product was then diluted by a ratio of 1:10 for further use and was stored at −20°C for RT-qPCR.
        
      
      
        Microarray and analysis
        The RNA samples were diluted to 100 ng/μl and independently used to perform the target preparation using a whole-transcript sense target labeling protocol (Affymetrix, High Wycombe, UK). Cluster analysis was performed using the unweighted pair group method, with arithmetic means based on Euclidean distance and with hierarchical clustering applied to the normalized data. Fold changes were calculated to identify the different expression profiles of mechanical asphyxia, craniocerebral injury and hemorrhagic shock. We used TreeView software to visualize the cluster analysis results.
      
      
        Gene expression quantification (qRT-PCR assay)
        To test the candidate miRNAs acquired from the microarray analysis, qRT-PCR was performed using the miRNA qRT-PCR SYBR Kit (Takara, Japan) in a final reaction volume of 20 μl. The reaction mix was run on an ABI Prism 7500 fluorescence quantitative PCR instrument (Applied Biosystems, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The results were normalized to U6 levels. Primer details are provided in Table 4. The primers were synthesized by Sangon Biotech China, Shanghai.
        
          Table 4
          
            Primers used to amplify RNA markers by RT-qPCR
          
          
            
              
                Genes
                Sequence of primer
              
              
                F-primer
                R-primer
              
            
            
              
                hsa-mir-122
                GCGTGGAGTGTGACAATGGTG
                Uni-miR qPCR Primer
              
              
                rno-mir-122
                TGGAGTGTGACAATGGTGTTTG
                Uni-miR qPCR Primer
              
              
                has/rno-U6
                TGACACGCAAATTCGTGAAGCGTTC
                Uni-miR qPCR Primer
              
              
                hsa-G6PC3
                GATGCCTAGCCTGGCTTATT
                CAGGACAGCGCCAGTTATTA
              
              
                hsa-ALDOA
                GCGTTGTGTGCTGAAGATTG
                GCTGGCAGATACTGGCATAA
              
              
                hsa-CS
                CATCCGTTTCCGAGGCTTTA
                CCTGTTCCTCTGTTGGGATATG
              
              
                hsa-18s
                GCCATGCATGTCTGAGTACGC
                CCGTCGGCATGTATTAGCTC
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Target prediction
        To select plausible targets to validate the significance of the detected miRNAs, microrna.org, TargetScan, and MirTarBase were used. Given that miRNAs may have a multitude of conserved miRNA species, UTR pairs were used.
      
      
        Western blot analyses
        Total proteins from the brain and myocardium tissues of rats were extracted using RIPA protein lysis buffer with phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), size-fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto 0.45-um polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, USA) according to the standard protocol. The following primary antibodies were used: anti-ALDOA (Abcam, ab169544, USA), anti-CS (Abcam, ab96600, USA), anti-G6PC3 (Biorbyt, orb156993, United Kingdom), and anti-ACTB (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The secondary antibody was horseradish peroxidase conjugated to goat anti-rabbit IgG (sc-2004, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Luminous detection was performed using ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Fisher, USA), and the signal was quantified using NIH ImageJ and normalized to ACTB.
      
      
        3'UTR reporter assay
        The 3'UTR fragment of the candidate target gene was subcloned into the Xba I site downstream of the luciferase gene in the pGL3-control vector (Promega). The negative controls were 3'UTR-mu and c-GFP. HEK293T cells were infected with c-GFP and mir-122 or mir-122M for 24 h. The cells were then seeded into 24-well plates and co-transfected with 0.5 μg of the respective pGL3-3'UTR construct and 0.05 μg of the pGL-TK vector (Promega). After 48 h, luciferase activity was measured using a Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System Kit (Promega).
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        To calculate the relative expression levels of the target miRNAs, we performed ΔCt normalization. Unpaired T-tests (with significance levels of p < 0.05) were calculated for the mechanical asphyxia, brain trauma and hemorrhagic shock conditions. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 17.0, and the data are presented with GraphPad Prism 5.0 software. The results were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.
      
    
  
        Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently been shown as novel promising diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers for various cancers. However, lncRNA expression patterns and their predictive value in early diagnosis of myocardial infarction (MI) have not been systematically investigated. In our study, we performed a comprehensive analysis of lncRNA expression profiles in MI and found altered lncRNA expression pattern in MI compared to healthy samples. We then constructed a lncRNA-mRNA dysregulation network (DLMCEN) by integrating aberrant lncRNAs, mRNAs and their co-dysregulation relationships, and found that some of mRNAs were previously reported to be involved in cardiovascular disease, suggesting the functional roles of dysregulated lncRNAs in the pathogenesis of MI. Therefore, using support vector machine (SVM) and leave one out cross-validation (LOOCV), we developed a 9-lncRNA signature (termed 9LncSigAMI) from the discovery cohort which could distinguish MI patients from healthy samples with accuracy of 95.96%, sensitivity of 93.88% and specificity of 98%, and validated its predictive power in early diagnosis of MI in another completely independent cohort. Functional analysis demonstrated that these nine lncRNA biomarkers in the 9LncSigAMI may be involved in myocardial innate immune and inflammatory response, and their deregulation may lead to the dysfunction of the inflammatory and immune system contributing to MI recurrence. With prospective validation, the 9LncSigAMI identified by our work will provide additional diagnostic information beyond other known clinical parameters, and increase the understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of MI.
      
    
      INTRODUCTION
      Myocardial Infarction (MI), commonly known as heart attack, is a serious result of coronary artery disease (CAD) caused by sudden blockage or extremely reduced blood flow in a coronary artery. MI remains the major cause of death and mortality globally, including China [1]. Over the past years, there is a sharply increasing trend in the morbidity of MI in China. Although statistics in 2011 suggested that there were about two million cases of MI accounting for 0.87% of cardiovascular disease (CVD)[2], it is estimated by that the number of patients with MI will increase to 23 million by 2030 [3]. Early diagnosis identifying subpopulations at high risk of having an infarct is crucial for deciding early tailored treatment to reduce MI mortality. Although currently available biomarkers, such as cardiac troponin and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB), have used to assist with timely diagnosis [4, 5], some novel molecular biomarkers have highlighted their promising potentials and important roles for early management in MI.
      Recent genome sequencing and transcriptomics analyses have revealed that only less than two percent of the human genome consists of protein-coding RNA, whereas the majority of the genome can be transcribed into RNA transcripts without protein coding capacity [6]. These non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) can be classified into two types based on their size: short RNAs and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Short RNAs, including microRNAs (miRNAs), have been widely studied during the past ten years. Many studies have reported the dysregulation of miRNA expression in MI, including miR-15 [7], miR-21 [8], miR-24 [9], miR-29 [10] and so on. LncRNAs, a major class of ncRNAs, was defined as ncRNA transcript with greater than 200 nucleotides. Since the lncRNAs H19 and Xist were firstly found to be involved in epigenetic regulation in the early 1990s [11, 12], increasing evidence has shown that lncRNAs are involved in the complex gene regulation network by as key molecular players at epigenetic, transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels [13, 14]. A handful of studies have revealed dysregulated expression of lncRNAs in a variety of disease states highlighting their potential clinical application as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers or therapeutic targets in the pathology of diverse diseases, including cancers [15–17]. Some studies have reported several lncRNA-focus signatures which could be useful to predict patients' prognosis or metastasis in various cancers [18–28]. Recent studies have shown the close association between MI and altered lncRNA expression [29, 30], highlighting the potential of lncRNAs as biomarkers in early diagnosis of MI. However, lncRNA expression patterns and their predictive value for MI have not been systematically investigated.
      In this study, we obtained lncRNA expression profiles and investigated the expression patterns between MI patients and healthy samples by re-annotating the publicly available Affymetrix microarray. Furthermore, we constructed and analyzed a dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network that is associated with the occurrence of MI. We aimed to detect potential lncRNA biomarkers closely correlated with MI, and to develop novel lncRNA signature for identifying subpopulations at high risk of having an infarct
    
    
      RESULTS
      
        Identification of deregulated mRNA and lncRNA in AMI patients
        We first performed SAM analysis to investigate the expression patterns of mRNAs and lncRNAs between AMI patients and healthy samples from the discovery cohort and identified 191 and 11 differentially expressed mRNAs and lncRNAs (logFC ≤1 or logFC >1, FDR-adjusted p <0.05). Among them, 175 mRNAs and 9 lncRNAs were over-expressed and 16 mRNAs and 2 lncRNAs were down-expressed in AMI patients compared with healthy samples (Supplementary Table S1).
      
      
        Construction and analysis of dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network
        We first investigated the co-expression correlations between differentially expressed mRNAs and differentially expressed lncRNAs. The lncRNA-mRNA pairs with a high PCC (>0.5) were selected as significantly dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression pairs and were integrated into the DLMCEN, in which there are 1822 edges between 188 mRNAs and 11 lncRNAs (Figure 1A). The investigation of the degree distribution of nodes in DLMCEN revealed a power-law distribution with a slope of −1.674 and R2 = 0.999 (Figure 1B), suggesting that DLMCEN has scale-free characteristics like many other biological networks distinguished from random networks. Moreover, the degree and betweenness centrality of lncRNAs are significantly higher than those of mRNAs (Wilcoxon rank-sum test) (Figure 1C and 1D), demonstrating that dysregulated lncRNAs tended to be hub nodes and played more important roles than mRNAs in the occurrence of AMI.
        
          Figure 1
          
            Construction and analysis of MI-related dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network
            A. The DLMCEN generated by the procedure described in the Methods, including 1822 edges between 188 mRNAs and 11 lncRNAs. B. Degree distribution of the DLMCEN. C. The LncRNAs have significantly higher degrees than mRNAs in the DLMCEN. D. The lncRNAs have significantly higher betweenness centrality than mRNAs the DLMCEN.
          
          
        
      
      
        Construction of SVM-based lncRNA signature in AMI diagnosis from the discovery cohort
        To identify an optimal lncRNA signature predictive of AMI, we have searched for lncRNA combinations among the 11 dysregulated lncRNAs in the DLMCEN, whose expression pattern can best distinguish AMI patients from the control samples, using SVM and LOOCV strategy in the discovery cohort. As shown in Figure 2A, a signature of 9 lncRNAs (termed 9LncSigAMI) with the highest accuracy was identified (Table 1). The classification of 99 samples in the discovery cohort using the 9LncSigAMI classifier achieved an accuracy of 95.96% with a sensitivity of 93.88% and a specificity of 98% (Figure 2B). The discriminatory power measured by AUC is 0.985 (Figure 2B). We also applied hierarchical clustering analysis to expression data of nine lncRNAs in the 9LncSigAMI from 49 AMI patients and 50 healthy samples and found 2 major sample clusters with clear differences in lncRNA expression patterns. As shown in Figure 2C, all healthy samples were grouped into Cluster 2 and most of AMI patients (33/49, 67.35%) were grouped into Cluster 1, revealing a significant association between lncRNA expression pattern and samples' disease status (p=5.431e-12, Chi-square test; Figure 2C). The above results demonstrated the good performance of the 9LncSigAMI in distinguishing AMI patients from healthy samples in the discovery cohort. Of these nine diagnostic biomarkers, eight lncRNAs tended to be risky lncRNAs whose up-regulated expression associated with AMI occurrence and only one lncRNAs was protective lncRNAs whose down-regulated expression associated with AMI occurrence (Figure 2C and 2D).
        
          Figure 2
          
            Identification and predictive value of SVM-based lncRNA signature in AMI diagnosis from the discovery cohort
            A. Classification performance of different numbers of lncRNA biomarkers. B. Performance evaluation of the 9LncSigAMI in early diagnosis using LOOCV procedure in the discovery cohort. C. The hierarchical clustering heat map of 99 samples based on expression profiles of 9 lncRNAs in the 9LncSigAMI in the discovery dataset. D. The expression levels of 9 lncRNAs in the 9LncSigAMI between MI patients and healthy samples
          
          
        
        
          Table 1
          
            The detailed information of lncRNA biomarkers in the 9LncSigAMI
          
          
            
              
                LncRNA ID
                Ensembl name
                Genome locations
                logFC
              
            
            
              
                ENSG00000246526
                RP11-539L10.2
                Chr 4: 6,687,448-6,690,519 (−)
                −1.02
              
              
                ENSG00000232451
                AC016768.1
                Chr 2: 23,018,125-23,199,056 (−)
                1.30
              
              
                ENSG00000258086
                RP11-753H16.5
                Chr 12: 54,353,792-54,466,985 (+)
                1.08
              
              
                ENSG00000249835
                VCAN-AS1
                Chr 5: 83,531,352-83,581,320 (−)
                1.26
              
              
                ENSG00000276107
                CTD-2033D15.2
                Chr 15: 39,586,561-39,587,293 (+)
                1.15
              
              
                ENSG00000279980
                GABARAPL3
                Chr 15: 90,347,587-90,349,437 (+)
                1.04
              
              
                ENSG00000270075
                RP11-127L20.5
                Chr 10: 104,312,141-104,313,881(+)
                1.11
              
              
                ENSG00000228262
                LINC01320
                Chr 2: 34,677,555-34,738,231 (+)
                1.27
              
              
                ENSG00000236266
                RP3-467L1.4
                Chr 1: 7,810,242-7,827,342 (−)
                1.08
              
            
          
        
      
      
        Validation of the 9LncSigAMI with an additional independent cohort
        To evaluate the robustness of the 9LncSigAMI, we conducted a further validation of the predictive power of 9LncSigAMI using an additional independent cohort of 52 samples from Suresh's study [31] (denoted “validation cohort”). We first performed a hierarchical clustering analysis based on the expression pattern of these nine diagnostic biomarkers. 52 samples in the validation cohort were clearly clustered into two distinct subgroups (Figure 3A), with significantly different disease status (p= 2.27e-02, Chi-square test). As observed in the discovery cohort, eight protective lncRNAs showed a higher expression in healthy samples in Cluster 1 and one risky lncRNA showed a higher expression in AMI samples in Cluster 2.
        
          Figure 3
          
            Validation of the 9LncSigAMI in the additional independent cohort
            A. The hierarchical clustering heat map of 52 samples based on expression profiles of 9 lncRNAs in the 9LncSigAMI in the test cohort. B. Performance evaluation of the 9LncSigAMI in early diagnosis using LOOCV procedure in the test cohort.
          
          
        
        We further assessed the predictive power of the 9LncSigAMI using SVM algorithm and LOOCV procedure. On the validation cohort, the 9LncSigAMI for distinguishing AMI patients from healthy samples achieves an AUC of 0.771 with a sensitivity of 70.97% and a specificity of 61.91% (Figure 3B). The 9LncSigAMI correctly classified 22 out of 31 AMI samples and 13 out of 21 control samples, resulting in 67.31% prediction accuracy. These results suggested that the 9LncSigAMI signature identified here was accurate and reliable for discriminating AMI patients from normal samples.
      
      
        Identification of associated biological pathways of the 9LncSigAMI
        As an initial step to infer potential biological functions of the 9LncSigAMI, we first examined the expression correlation between mRNAs and nine lncRNAs using the Pearson correlation coefficient and identified 517 mRNAs positively correlated with at least one of the nine lncRNAs. Then GO and KEGG function enrichment analysis for mRNAs co-expressed with lncRNAs was conducted to identify associated biological processes and pathways of the 9LncSigAMI. Results with GO analysis revealed that mRNAs co-expressed with nine lncRNAs tended to be significantly enriched in 30 GO terms in the “Biological Process” (GOTERM-BP-FAT) (adjusted p-value < 0.10 and an enrichment score of >1.5) (Supplementary Table S2), which were grouped into four functional clusters including immune response, inflammatory response, regulation of cytokine and cell death (Figure 4A). The analysis of KEGG showed that mRNAs co-expressed with nine lncRNAs were involved in several pathways including Hematopoietic cell lineage, Cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, Adipocytokine signaling pathway, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, Chemokine signaling pathway and NOD-like receptor signaling pathway (Supplementary Table S3). These biological processes and pathways have been reported to be close with myocardial infarction [32–39], suggesting that the perturbation of nine lncRNAs in the 9LncSigAMI played important parts in the occurrence of AMI by interacting with mRNAs involved in known MI-related biological processes and pathways.
        
          Figure 4
          
            Function enrichment maps of the diagnostic lncRNAs
            A. The functional enrichment map of GO terms with each node represents a GO term and an edge represents the proportion of shared genes between connecting GO terms. B. The enriched KEGG pathways ranked by −log10 (p-value).
          
          
        
      
    
    
      DISCUSSION
      Increasing evidence has revealed that lncRNA has complex and important roles in cardiovascular diseases, including MI [40, 41]. For example, the down-regulated expression of lncRNA UCA1 has been observed at the early state of AMI patients [29]. Vausort and colleagues measured expression levels of five lncRNAs in 414 patients using quantitative PCR, and identified a lncRNA MIAT highly relevant to MI [30]. The above studies have demonstrated the potential roles of lncRNAs as promising novel biomarkers for the diagnosis and/or prognosis of MI. However, the current research strategies focused on molecular diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers have mainly analyzed expression profiles of mRNA or miRNAs [5] [42, 43]. Although transcriptome analysis has been reported in the AMI mouse model [44], there is a lack of the investigation into expression patterns and diagnostic values of lncRNA in MI patients owing to the limitation of available expression data in human. Recent studies revealed that lncRNA expression profiles could be obtained by re-annotating the probes in the commonly used microarrays [18, 19, 23, 45].
      In this study, we obtained and analyzed lncRNA expression profiles of 151 samples (80 AMI patients and 71 healthy samples) by repurposing two publicly available microarray expression datasets to determine whether there is significantly altered lncRNA expression pattern between AMI patients and healthy samples. We observed significantly different lncRNA expression patterns in AMI patients compared to healthy samples and identified 11 differentially expressed lncRNAs, implying that these dysregulated lncRNAs may be associated with MI. Previous studies have demonstrated that lncRNAs function as key regulators of gene expression by interacting with protein-coding genes to participate in biological processes [46, 47]. Therefore, to identify functional lncRNAs and its partners, we investigated the co-expression relationship between dysregulated lncRNAs and dysregulated mRNAs and constructed a dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network (DLMCEN). As general biological networks, the DLMCEN exhibited scale-free and modular characteristics. These dysregulated lncRNAs were found to be topologically central within DLMCEN and have maximal informational connections with other dysregulated mRNAs. After a comprehensive searching in both genetic association database (GAD) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (OMIM), 58 protein-coding genes in the DLMCEN have been found to be associated with cardiovascular disease, 18 of which were involved in MI (Supplementary Table S4). These observations indicated that the altered expression of these 11 lncRNAs in the DLMCEN contributed to the development of MI and could be used as potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of MI patients. Hierarchical clustering analysis revealed that these dysregulated lncRNAs in the DLMCEN were significantly correlated with disease status, highlighting their potential clinically application to assess the risk of MI and improve diagnosis prediction of MI. To identifying an optimal lncRNA signature considering a balance between accuracy and the number of lncRNAs, we used SVM and random forest method to detect a combination of lncRNAs that has a remarkable ability to distinguish AMI patients from healthy samples. After the feature selection procedure, 9 of 11 dysregulated lncRNAs was identified as optimal lncRNAs biomarkers with the highest accuracy. Thus, we developed an SVM-based diagnostic predictor as a lncRNA signature based on expression profiles of nine lncRNAs. The superior performance of the 9LncSigAMI in early AMI detection was further validated in the discovery cohort and another completely independent cohort.
      Since only a few of lncRNAs have been annotated functionally, we performed bioinformatics analysis to infer possible associated biological roles of MI-related lncRNAs. From the co-expression network based on dysregulated lncRNAs and mRNAs, we performed functional enrichment analysis for co-expressed mRNAs and found that these mRNAs were enriched in several known MI-related biological processes and pathways. For example, TLR4, the members of the Toll-like receptors (TLR) family in the Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, have been found to play a detrimental role in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury [48]. Cytokines, an inflammatory factor, were observed to be significantly up-regulated or down-regulated expression in AMI patients, and the altered cytokine expression had impacts on the immune functions in patients with AMI [33]. Chemokines, a family of chemotactic cytokines, acted as a modulator in complex biological processes such as cell proliferation and gene transcription, and its overexpression may be a reparative response following MI [37]. Therefore, it is a plausible inference that these nine lncRNA biomarkers may be involved in myocardial innate immune and inflammatory response, and their deregulation may lead to the dysfunction of the inflammatory and immune system contributing to MI recurrence.
      In summary, we performed a comprehensive survey of the expression profiles of lncRNAs and coding RNAs from MI patients and healthy samples in a large of samples and constructed a dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network which will improve our understanding of MI-related lncRNAs from a network view. Furthermore, we developed and validated a SVM-based lncRNA signature in use for early diagnosis of AMI with high accuracy. To our knowledge, this study is the first to access the application of lncRNAs for diagnostic prediction of MI. With prospective validation, the lncRNA signature identified by our work will provide additional diagnostic information beyond other known clinical parameters, and increase the understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of MI.
    
    
      MATERIALS AND METHODS
      
        Gene expression profile dataset
        The gene expression profile data based on Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (HG-U133_Plus_2.0) from two independent nonoverlapping cohorts of AMI patients were obtained from the publicly available GEO database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). The initial discovery cohort of 49 AMI patients and 50 healthy samples were obtained from GEO (GSE66360, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE66360) and used to identify novel lncRNAs biomarkers for AMI diagnosis. Another AMI patient dataset was also downloaded from GEO (GSE48060, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE48060)[31], denoted “validation cohort”, including 31 AMI patients and 21 healthy samples and was considered as an independent test cohort to validate the diagnostic power of lncRNA biomarkers.
      
      
        Acquisition of lncRNA expression profiles
        The raw expression profile data (.CEL files) of 99 samples in the discovery cohort and 52 samples in the validation cohort were downloaded from the GEO database. The probe set sequences of Affymetrix HG-U133_Plus_2.0 were obtained from the Affymetrix website (http://www.affymetrix.com). LncRNA expression data of 151 samples were obtained using the probe re-annotation strategy as previously described [18, 19, 24]. Briefly, probe sets of HG-U133_Plus_2.0 array were aligned to the human genome (GRCh38) and lncRNA gene sequence from GENCODE (release 23) using SeqMap tool with no mismatch [49]. Then lncRNA-specific probes were obtained by mapping the genomic locations of probes to the genomic locations of lncRNAs. Finally, expression data of 2332 lncRNA were obtained for further analysis.
      
      
        Expression profiles analysis
        The significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) method was used to identify differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs between AMI patients and healthy samples. The expression variation from AMI patients to healthy samples was characterized by logFC (log 2 fold change) and associated p-values adjusted after Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) control approach [50]. Down- and up-regulated mRNAs and lncRNAs were selected with the cut-off criterion of a logFC < −1 and logFC >1 respectively, with FDR-adjusted p < 0.05. Hierarchical clustering analysis was carried out to investigate the patterns of lncRNA expression in the different samples, and the chi-square test was used to analyze the correlations between AMI status and lncRNA biomarkers.
      
      
        Construction and analysis of dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network
        The dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression network (DLMCEN) in AMI patients was constructed as follows: Firstly, Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) was calculated by measuring the expression relationships between differentially expressed mRNAs and differentially expressed lncRNAs. Then lncRNA-mRNA pairs with a high PCC (>0.5) were selected as dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression pairs. Finally, a DLMCEN was constructed for AMI by assembling all dysregulated lncRNA-mRNA co-expression pairs identified above. A node represents a lncRNA or mRNA, and mRNA and lncRNA are connected if they are differentially co-expressed.
      
      
        Construction of SVM-based lncRNA signature in AMI diagnosis
        A lncRNA-focus predictive signature for sample classification was developed using the support vector machine (SVM) with the sigmoid kernel. The performance of SVM-based lncRNA signature was estimated using the leave one out cross-validation (LOOCV). Sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were calculated through a 2 × 2 contingency table, and the ROC curve was drawn by plotting true positive rates (sensitivity) against false positive rates (1-specificity).
        To construct an optimal lncRNA signature in AMI diagnosis, optimal lncRNA biomarkers were selected using the random forest supervised classification algorithm as follows: (i) candidate lncRNA biomarkers were ranked according to their random forest importance value. (ii) The SVM-based signature was developed by adding one lncRNA at a time in a top-down order starting with the first two lncRNAs in the lncRNA ranking list, and the performance of the SVM-based signature was evaluated using LOOCV. (iii) The optimal number of lncRNA biomarkers in the signature could be found when achieving the highest classification accuracy.
      
      
        Functional analysis of lncRNA biomarkers
        The expression correlations between lncRNA biomarkers and mRNAs were calculated using the Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs). The mRNAs positively correlated with biomarkers (PCCs>0.60) was chosen as co-expressed mRNAs associated with lncRNA signature. We performed bioinformatics analysis to predict the function of lncRNA signature by functional enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) for co-expressed mRNAs. Functional enrichment analysis was carried out using DAVID Bioinformatics Tool (version 6.7) which is widely used to discover the biological implications of a set of genes [51]. Enriched GO terms limited in “Biological Process” (GOTERM-BP-FAT) and KEGG pathways with an adjusted p-value of <0.10 using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure and an enrichment score of >1.5 were considered as significant functional annotations. Enrichment maps of significant GO terms were constructed and visualized using the Enrichment Map plugin in Cytoscape software [52].
      
    
    
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS TABLES
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
      
        
      
    
  
        
          Background
          MicroRNAs exist widely in viruses, plants and animals. As endogenous small non-coding RNAs, miRNAs regulate a variety of biological processes. Tissue miRNA expression studies have discovered numerous functions for miRNAs in various tissues of chicken, but the regulation of miRNAs in chicken pituitary and hypothalamic development related to high and low egg-laying performance has remained unclear.
        
        
          Results
          In this study, using high-throughput sequencing technology, we sequenced two tissues (pituitary and hypothalamus) in 3 high- and 3 low-rate egg production Luhua chickens at the age of 300 days. By comparing low- and high-rate egg production chickens, 46 known miRNAs and 27 novel miRNAs were identified as differentially expressed (P < 0.05). Six differentially expressed known miRNAs, which are expressed in both tissues, were used in RT-qPCR validation and SNP detection. Among them, seven SNPs in two miRNA precursors (gga-miR-1684a and gga-miR-1434) were found that might enhance or reduce the production of the mature miRNAs. In addition, 124 and 30 reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs were identified by RNA-seq in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues, respectively and randomly selected candidate miRNA and miRNA-target pairs were validated by RT-qPCR in Jiuyuan black fowl. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway annotation illustrated that a large number of egg laying-related pathways were enriched in the high-rate egg production chickens, including ovarian steroidogenesis and steroid hormone biosynthesis.
        
        
          Conclusions
          These differentially expressed miRNAs and their predicted target genes, especially identified reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs, advance the study of miRNA function and egg production associated miRNA identification. The analysis of the miRNA-related SNPs and their effects provided insights into the effects of SNPs on miRNA biogenesis and function. The data generated in this study will further our understanding of miRNA regulation mechanisms in the chicken egg-laying process.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12864-017-3644-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can modulate almost all biological processes at the post-transcriptional level in viruses, plants and animals. miRNAs are a class of small endogenous non-coding RNAs that are approximately 19 to 24 nucleotides in length [1]. miRNAs negatively regulate extensive gene expression through sequence-specific interactions with the 3′untranslated regions (UTRs) of target mRNAs and thereby cause mRNA destabilization or translational repression [2, 3]. Currently, 35,828 mature miRNAs from 223 species have been discovered and deposited in the publicly available miRNA database miRBase (Release 21.0, June 2014) [4]. Genome-wide miRNA expression studies demonstrate that miRNAs have numerous significant biological functions, especially for signaling pathways implicated in development, cellular differentiation, hematopoiesis, proliferation, apoptosis and oncogenesis [1, 5–8].
      Chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) are an important model organism that bridges the evolutionary gap between mammals and other vertebrates [9]. Chickens were domesticated in Asia at least by 5400 BC, perhaps as early as 8000 BC [10]. Previous studies have reported abundant miRNA identification in various chicken tissues, such as embryo [8, 11–14], ovary and testis [13, 15], lung and trachea [16], somite [17], adipose tissue [18], skeletal muscle [19] and immune organs [20]. Further, some studies have assessed diseases in chicken [21–23]. However, a role for miRNAs in chicken pituitary and hypothalamic development related to high and low egg-laying performance has not been reported clearly. The characteristics of pituitary and hypothalamic tissues are highly related with growth development and reproductive traits of chickens, and they are ideal tissues to identify molecular markers associated with egg production [24].
      In the present study, we constructed small-RNA cDNA libraries from pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of Luhua chicken using individuals at the age of 300 days with relatively high and low rates of egg production. In poultry breeding programs, the egg number at 300 days of age is generally used as the most valuable indicator of total egg production potential [25]. Through high-throughput sequencing of small RNA libraries and subsequent bioinformatic analysis, comprehensive miRNA profiles of pituitary and hypothalamic tissues from low and high rate of egg production chickens were generated, and comparative analysis of miRNA data was performed. The discovery of miRNA resources from this study will contribute to a better understanding in miRNAs regulating chicken egg production biological processes. Moreover, we will be able to screen suitable miRNAs for use as molecular markers in the application of genetic selection in the chicken breeding programs.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Experimental animals, tissue collection, rna extraction and sequencing
        Eight hundred Luhua chickens from the Experimental Chicken Farm of Sichuan Agricultural University were used in this study. Then, low rate of egg production (LP) chicken and high rate of egg production (HP) chickens were categorized according to their egg number at 250 days of age. The egg production distribution of 800 birds at 300 days of age was shown in Additional file 1: Figure S1. According to the similar reproductive traits and regular egg production cycle, three LP and three HP chickens (Additional file 2: Table S1) were selected for tissue collection at 300 days of age. More detailed animal descriptions, sample grouping and egg production cycle recording methods can be found in our previous study [26].
        The pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of six chickens were dissected as described [27], then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until RNA extraction. The total RNA of pituitary and hypothalamus was isolated by using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) followed the manufacturer’s instructions. Twelve complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries for small RNA from chicken pituitary and hypothalamic tissues were constructed according to published miRNA cloning protocols [28, 29]. All samples were sequenced by 50-bp paired end reads (PE-50) on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Sichuan Agricultural University approved animal experimentation in this study under permit number DKY- S20143204.
      
      
        Sequence analysis
        The Illumina 5’ and 3’ sequencing adapters were trimmed with Cutadapt software [30], and the small RNA libraries were further filtered to a minimum length of 17 nt and a maximum length of 35 nt. The clean reads were mapped to the chicken genome (galGal4) using MegaBLAST, and rRNA, tRNA, miscRNA, snRNA and snoRNA were discarded from the small RNA sequences. The remaining sequences were again searched against the miRBase 21.0 database [31–33] of Gallus gallus known miRNA sequences with zero or one mismatch. The sequences matching the Gallus gallus miRBase database were considered as known miRNA sequences. Next, after filtering known miRNA sequences, the remaining sequences were BLAST searched against the Gallus gallus genome. The sequences matching the chicken genome were used to predict the novel miRNA by the mirDeep2 [34–36] using default parameters. These sequences were considered as potential novel miRNAs, and expression of all miRNAs was assayed. Differential expression for known and novel miRNAs were analyzed using edgeR [37]. Reads per million miRNAs mapped (RPM) values were used to represent miRNA expression levels. P-values were calculated using right-tailed Fisher’s exact test. P < 0.05 and |Log2Fold Change| ≥1(LogFC) were used to screen differentially expressed miRNAs. The miRNA target prediction software miRDB [38] was used to predict the binding sites of the differentially expressed miRNA. The TargetScan principle (http://www.targetscan.org/) was also applied in the prediction procedures. The main functions of the predicted target genes regulated by differentially expressed miRNAs were determined using GO and KEGG functional classifications by Blast2GO program [39]. In GO terms, P-value ≤ 0.001 was used to identify the significantly enriched GO terms, and the P-value cut-off was 0.05 for KEGG terms.
      
      
        Validation of miRNA expression by RT-qPCR
        To validate the reliability of Illumina analysis, we tested the expression of eight miRNAs expressed in both tissues, including six significantly differentially expressed miRNAs and two non-significant expressed miRNAs, using reverse transcription (RT) Real-time PCR. The RT-qPCR primers were designed using Primer 5.0 (http://downloads.fyxm.net/Primer-Premier-101178.html), and listed in Additional file 2: Table S2 (miRNA-specific primers were synthesized by the Shanghai Biological Technology Co., and universal primers were provided by the miRcute miRNA qPCR Detection kit, Aidlab, Beijing, China). Real-time PCR was performed in a 96-wells plate using a Bio-Rad iQ5 Real-time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, California, USA) according to the protocol. In addition, 5.8S rRNA, which has relatively stable expression in most tissues, was used as an endogenous control [40], and the expression level of 5.8S rRNA was used to normalize the RT-qPCR results for each miRNA. All reactions were run in three technical replicates and included negative controls without template. Fold-changes of miRNA expression were calculated using the 2-ΔΔCt method (versus 5.8S rRNA) [41]. All data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation, and statistical analysis using Student’s t-tests was performed with SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS Inc.).
      
      
        Validation of candidate miRNA and miRNA-target pairs in the Jiuyuan black fowl
        The Jiuyuan black fowl (Gallus Domesticus) is similar with Luhua bird, which has been recognized as a commercial dual-purpose egg-meat type chicken, but Luhua bird has a more superior reproductive performance such as high rates of egg production. Four hundred Jiuyuan black fowls from the Experimental Chicken Farm of Sichuan Agricultural University were used in this study. The processes of samples selection, tissues collection, RNA extraction and RT-qPCR validation of miRNAs and genes expression were according to previous described methods. The reproductive performance information of selected chicken samples was shown in Additional file 2: Table S1 and Additional file 1: Figure S2. The RT-qPCR primers of miRNAs and genes were listed in Additional file 2: Table S2. In addition, the expression levels of 5.8S rRNA and GAPDH were used to normalize the RT-qPCR results for each miRNA and gene, respectively.
      
      
        Detection of SNPs in miRNAs
        To explore the effects of SNPs on six known miRNAs differentially expressed in both tissues, SNPs in 120 low and 120 high rate of egg production chickens were scanned. Blood samples (0.5 to 1 ml) were collected in a 1-ml syringe primed with EDTA anticoagulation agent. Genomic DNA was phenol-extracted following standard procedures [42]. Six pairs of primer (Additional file 2: Table S2) were used for PCR, and products were sequenced by an ABI 3730xl automatic sequencer. The obtained sequences were aligned with the miRNA precursors using the program Seqman 5.01 of DNAstar Software (DNAstar Inc. Madison, WI, USA) [43]. To study the effect of SNPs on miRNA biogenesis, we calculated the second structure energy of different SNP-type precursors using RNAfold (http://nhjy.hzau.edu.cn/kech/swxxx/jakj/dianzi/Bioinf4/miRNA/miRNA1.htm) [44] and compared the energy changes between SNP-type pre-miRNAs and wild type pre-miRNAs.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Overview of miRNA sequencing
        In total, 70.23 and 74.02 million raw reads were obtained from LP and HP chickens, respectively. After filtering the low-quality sequences, a total of 64.39 (clean ratio: 91.64%) and 67.20 (clean ratio: 90.85%) million clean reads in LP and HP chickens, respectively, were used for further analysis (Additional file 2: Table S3). Among the clean reads, 50.18 M reads from LP and 51.05 M reads from HP were successfully mapped and annotated, amounting to 77.92% and 75.96% of the total reads, respectively. In addition, 48.13 M reads in LP and 47.88 M reads in HP were found to be similar to miRNAs. HP chickens have more small RNAs and unique small RNAs than LP chicken in both tissues. The remaining of the mapped reads were other types of RNA, including rRNA, tRNA, miscRNA (repeat and polII-transcribed), snRNA and snoRNA (Additional file 2: Table S4). In total small RNAs, most small RNA were miRNA (approximately 70%) followed by unannotated RNAs (approximately 20%). However, in the unique small RNAs, unannotated RNAs account for the biggest proportion (approximately 40%), and miRNA (approximately 30%) ranked second, except in the hypothalamus of HP chickens (Additional file 1: Figure S3). Proportions of the remaining categories of small RNAs, including tRNA, rRNA, miscRNA, snRNA or snoRNA, were relatively lower (less than 2%). The size distribution of small RNAs was similar in all tissues, and the majority of them changed from 20 to 24 nt, which was consistent with the typical size range of small RNAs (Additional file 1: Figure S4). The most abundant size class was 22 nt, which accounted for approximately 10% in the unique reads and 40% in the total reads in the four libraries.
      
      
        Expression patterns of known and novel miRNAs in chicken pituitary and hypothalamus
        In the present study, a total of 651 (LP:562, HP:594) and 645 known miRNAs (LP:585, HP:555) was identified in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues, respectively (Additional file 2: Table S5). In the pituitary, 505 (77.6%) unique miRNAs were co-expressed in LP and HP chickens; 57 (8.7%) and 89 (13.7%) were specifically expressed in LP and HP chickens, respectively. In the hypothalamus, 495 (76.7%) unique miRNAs were co-expressed in LP and HP chickens; 90 (14%) and 60 (9.3%) were specifically expressed in LP and HP chickens, respectively (Fig. 1). The minimal differences in the specifically expressed miRNAs of LP and HP chickens reflect the organizational complementarity of the two tissues.Fig. 1The distribution of known and novel miRNAs in pituitary and hypothalamus tissues

        A total of 649 novel miRNAs (LP:538, HP:574) and 635 novel miRNAs (LP:541, HP:556) were predicted in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues, respectively (Additional file 2: Table S6). In pituitary, 463 (71.3%) unique miRNAs were co-expressed in LP and HP chickens; 75 (11.6%) and 111 (17.1%) were specifically expressed in LP and HP chickens, respectively. In the hypothalamus, 462 (72.8%) unique miRNAs were co-expressed in LP and HP chickens; 79 (12.4%) and 94 (14.8%) were specifically expressed in LP and HP chickens, respectively (Fig. 1).
        In the known miRNA expression profile of the pituitary and hypothalamus, the read numbers of the top 10 miRNAs accounted for 73.65% and 79.26% of the total reads, respectively. In the novel miRNA expression profile, the read numbers of the top 10 miRNAs accounted for 97.35% and 97.63% of the total reads for the pituitary and hypothalamus, respectively. The expression profile revealed that most miRNAs were expressed by a small portion of miRNA genes. Interestingly, although there were some changes in the rank of miRNA expression, the known and novel miRNAs with the highest expression levels were consistent in the two tissues. In known miRNAs, gga-miR-26a-5p displayed greater than 12 M reads and exhibited the highest expression level followed by gga-miR-99a-5p, which displayed greater than 5 M reads. Some miRNAs (such as gga-miR-6516-5p and gga-miR-130a-5p) displayed less than approximately 1,000 reads, indicating that expression significantly varied among different miRNA families, which is consistent with previous studies [45]. In novel miRNAs, we found that the most abundant novel miRNA, gga-novel-1-mature, displayed greater than approximately 0.96 M reads in pituitary, it only displayed approximately 0.39 M reads in hypothalamus. The significant difference of miRNA expression may reflect the miRNA different functions in the two tissues.
        Moreover, compared with known miRNAs, the sequencing frequencies of novel miRNAs were considerably reduced. The same expression pattern has also been reported in other species [46, 47], which suggests that novel miRNAs are typically weakly expressed, whereas known miRNA genes are highly expressed.
      
      
        miRNA:miRNA* pairs in chicken pituitary and hypothalamus
        The miRNA:miRNA* pairs are the mature miRNAs and miRNA*s (miR-#-5p and miR-#-3p) align to the 5′ and 3′ end regions of the precursors, respectively. In the study, a total of 181 duplex like miRNA:miRNA* pairs were obtained from known miRNA sequences of the two tissues (Additional file 2: Table S7). Commonly, the miR-#-5 ps were detected at the same or relatively high expression levels than miR-#-3 ps (Table 1), suggesting that the expression level of miR-#-3p mainly relied on the degradation degree and rate because both strands of miRNA duplex were produced in equal amounts by transcription. However, some miR-#-3p exhibited relatively increased expression levels compared with miR-#-5p (such as gga-miR-92-3p, gga-miR-7471-3p, gga-miR-130c-3p). Recently, some miRNA* sequences (miR-#-3p) with abundant expression were reported as mature functional miRNAs [48]. The relatively high number of reads of these miRNA*s indicates that they may play a functional role in regulating gene expression, such as reproduction regulation, in present study. Such a phenomenon has also been described in several previous studies [46, 47].Table 1The detail distribution of miRNA:miRNA* pairs in pituitary and hypothalamus tissuesTissuesNumber of miRNA:miRNA*(pairs)miR-#-5p ≥ miR-#-3p(pairs)miR-#-5p < miR-#-3p(pairs)Common in the two tissues(pairs)Unique in each tissue(pairs)Total(pairs)pituitary163867714518181hypothalamus163877618

      
      
        Hierarchical cluster analysis of differentially expressed miRNAs
        Correlation analysis revealed high reproducibility in the same group, with Pearson correlation coefficients >0.75 (Additional file 1: Figure S5). By comparing the abundance of known and novel miRNAs between HP and LP chickens (Fig. 2), a total of 46 known miRNAs and 27 novel miRNAs that are differentially expressed (P < 0.05) in the two tissues were identified (Additional file 2: Table S8). Specifically, 21 up-regulated and 21 down-regulated miRNAs were identified in pituitary tissues, and 24 up-regulated and 15 down-regulated miRNAs were identified in hypothalamus tissues. In addition, for the absolute values of logFC, the majority of differentially expressed miRNAs exhibit a 1- to 4-fold difference, and 18 miRNAs showed differences greater than 4-fold between the LP and HP in the two tissues. Among the up-regulated miRNAs, gga-novel-148-mature had the highest logFC at 5.01-fold. Among the down-regulated miRNAs, gga-novel-16-mature and gga-novel-220-mature had the highest |logFC| with 9.70-fold, followed by gga-novel-306-mature, gga-miR-1682, gga-miR-1683 and gga-miR-6549-3p, |logFC| with more than 5-fold.Fig. 2Scatter plot of the high-throughput sequencing data. The high-throughput sequencing data (differentially expressed miRNAs) are graphed on the scatter plot to visualize variations in miRNA expression between HP and LP chickens. Diagrams reflect fold change value (HP/LP) distribution in the differentially expressed miRNA numbers. In MA and volcano plots, red dots represent the differentially expressed miRNAs, whereas black represent miRNAs with similar expression

        To validate the Illumina small RNA deep sequencing data, RT-qPCR detection assays were used to confirm the expression of eight miRNAs expressed in both tissues, including six differentially expressed known miRNAs and two non-significant expressed miRNAs. As shown in Table 2 and Fig. 3, the general expression patterns of eight miRNAs from the Illumina sequencing are consistent with the RT-qPCR results, which further support the reliability of the Illumina sequencing data. The discrepancies with respect to ratio may be attributed to the essentially different algorithms and sensitivities between the two techniques.Table 2Evaluation of the expression profile variation between RNA-Seq and RT-qPCR for the selected miRNAsTissuemiRNAFold change (HP/LP)
P-valueRNA-SeqRT-qPCRRNA-SeqRT-qPCRpituitarygga-miR-1744-3p0.320.660.02960.0279gga-miR-122-5p0.260.230.00390.0095gga-miR-14340.420.280.04640.0229gga-miR-99a-5p0.870.780.66800.1060gga-miR-26a-5p0.840.630.53700.2780gga-miR-34b-3p3.343.530.03770.0477gga-miR-34c-3p3.863.390.03620.0401gga-miR-1684a-3p30.5731.120.00040.0010hypothalamusgga-miR-1744-3p0.150.230.00210.0064gga-miR-34b-3p0.160.220.00230.0012gga-miR-34c-3p0.180.140.00040.0062gga-miR-99a-5p1.341.310.36200.0685gga-miR-26a-5p1.190.690.54300.2510gga-miR-122-5p7.416.630.00210.0005gga-miR-14344.994.350.00180.0211gga-miR-1684a-3p24.4726.810.00370.0006
Fig. 3Validation of the miRNA expression profile by qRT-PCR. The relative expression levels of eight selected miRNAs were calculated according to the 2-ΔΔCt method using 5.8S rRNA as an internal reference RNA. Error bars represent the standard deviation. The x-axis indicates different miRNAs in the two tissues. *P < 0.05, **P <0.01, ***P < 0.001

      
      
        Target prediction and Gene Functional Annotation
        In total, we predicted 2541 target genes in pituitary and 2108 target genes in hypothalamic tissues (Additional file 2: Table S9). Some predicted targets were likely to be targeted by multiple miRNAs at multiple targeting sites. Typically, tyrosine-protein kinase receptor (CTK-1) can be targeted by three miRNAs, including gga-miR-15c-5p, gga-miR-15a and gga-miR-16-5p.
        To probe the biological roles of differentially expressed miRNAs, all of the predicted targets of them were mapped to terms in the GO and KEGG databases. In total, 369 GO terms and 28 KEGG pathways in pituitary tissues and 201 GO terms and 19 KEGG pathways in hypothalamic tissues were significantly enriched (Additional file 2: Table S10). GO enrichment analysis revealed that target genes were main functionally enriched in cellular process, cell, cell part and protein binding in the two tissues (Additional file 1: Figure S6). KEGG analysis results showed that most targets in pituitary tissues were mainly involved in focal adhesion, endocytosis, insulin signaling pathway, hepatitis B and FoxO signaling pathway. In hypothalamic tissues, most targets were mainly involved in protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, microRNAs in cancer, wnt signaling pathway, dopaminergic synapse and ubiquitin mediated proteolysis (Fig. 4). Notably, a specific enrichment of genes was observed in some reproduction regulation pathways, such as ovarian steroidogenesis, oocyte meiosis, GnRH signaling pathways, progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation, calcium signaling pathways, endocrine and other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption, dopaminergic synapse, oxytocin signaling pathway and MAPK signaling pathway (Additional file 2: Table S11).Fig. 4Selected significant pathway annotation in pituitary and hypothalamus tissues

      
      
        The identification of reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs
        In order to further explore the relationship between differentially expressed miRNAs and their predicted targets, we added a transcriptome analysis in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of the six samples using RNA-seq. A total of 662 and 336 differentially expressed genes (P < 0.05) were identified in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues, respectively (Fig. 5a and Additional file 2: Table S12). By comparing miRNAs predicted targets and these differentially expressed genes, 124 and 30 miRNA-target pairs demonstrated a reciprocal expression pattern in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues, respectively (Additional file 2: Table S13). KEGG analysis were also conducted on these miRNA-target pairs, and most mapped pathways were demonstrated to play important roles in regulating metabolism, development, reproduction, tumorigenesis and many other processes. These predicted reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs will provide invaluable insights into candidate miRNAs and genes for reproductive traits and selective breeding of chicken.Fig. 5
a The distribution of differentially expressed genes in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues between low- and high-rate egg production chickens. b Validation of eight miRNA expression profile by qRT-PCR in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of Jiuyuan black fowl. c, d The expression of randomly selected four miRNA-target pairs in the pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of Jiuyuan black fowl. The same color indicated the miRNA and its corresponding reciprocally expressed target genes. The expression of each miRNA was normalized to 5.8S rRNA and then transformed to a log 2 scale. The expression of each target gene was relative to GAPDH and also transformed to a log 2 scale. All four miRNA-target pairs showed significantly reciprocal expression patterns

      
      
        Influence of SNPs in miRNAs on the energy of the miRNA secondary structure
        Mutations in miRNAs or in their target sites have been demonstrated to potentially enhance or interrupt miRNA biogenesis or target alteration [49–52], resulting in phenotypic changes associated with diseases or traits [51, 53, 54]. To date, the effects of SNPs on miRNA biogenesis and regulation in chickens have not been reported. In the present study, using conventional Sanger sequencing, we PCR-amplified and sequenced six precursors of known miRNAs, gga-miR-1684a-3p, gga-miR-1744-3p, gga-miR-34b-3p, gga-miR-34c-3p, gga-miR-122-5p and gga-miR-1434, which are differentially expressed in both tissues. All the precursor regions were successfully covered. When the Sanger reads were compared with the reference precursors, we found that two miRNA precursors, gga-mir-1684a and gga-mir-1434, were identified as containing SNPs. In total, 83 haplotypes, 81 SNP sites and 112 SNPs were successfully detected (Table 3). By comparison of statistical significance, we found that the distribution of haplotypes showed no significant differences between HP and LP chickens. However, regarding the distribution of SNP sites and SNP numbers, HP chickens had significantly greater SNP sites and SNP numbers compared with LP chickens. These data indicate that HP chickens with a high egg-laying trait have more mutations in the miRNA biogenesis, which may have special physiological significance in the egg-laying process.Table 3Overview of PCR data processing of all sequencing samplesmiRNAPrecursor/Stem-loop sequenceGene familyAccessionNumber of samplesNumber of haplotypes
P-valueNumber of polymorphic sites
P-valueNumber of SNP
P-valuegga-miR-1684a-3pgga-mir-1684amir-1684MIMAT0007572HP:71LP:73HP:16LP:19Total:280.6252HP:34LP:15Total:350.0005***HP:40LP:17Total:445.0214E-05***gga-miR-1434gga-mir-1434mir-1434MIMAT0007295HP:100LP:111HP:25LP:34Total:550.3629HP:45LP:31Total:460.0099**HP:61LP:38Total:680.0001****P < 0.05, **P <0.01, ***P < 0.001 meant significant difference between the HP and LP chickens

        Next, we investigated the effect of the SNPs on the energy change (ΔΔG) of the secondary structures of the two precursors. Given the large sample sizes for SNP identification and to avoid the calculation of too many SNPs and effect of sequence error, haplotypes in which the sample size was less than 3 were not considered. In total, we statistically analyzed 10 haplotypes, 8 SNP sites and 10 SNPs in the two miRNA precursors (Additional file 2: Table S14). We found that an SNP in the mature regions did not change the energy of the structure, whereas the remaining 9 SNPs changed the energy of the predicted secondary structures (Table 4). For seven of the SNPs, the absolute energy change values were ≥ 0.3 kcal/mol, which is the minimum energy change reported to be required to change the production of mature miRNAs [49]. Gong et al. summarized the rule that if an SNP increases the hairpin structure energy, the production of the mature miRNA will increase. If the SNP decreases the energy, the production of the mature miRNA will be reduced [55]. The identified seven SNPs therefore enhance or reduce the production of the mature miRNAs and may play special physiological roles in the egg-laying process.Table 4Effect of SNPs on miRNA precursor energy changesPrecursorSNP position in PrecursorSNPSNP locationΔΔG (kcal/mol)gga-mir-1684a6C→Gstem−1.920G→Ustem5.038C→Uanti-stem1.339A→Ganti-stem−0.243U→Cloop−2.778A→Gmature−2.878A→Cmature−6.9gga-miR-143419A→Gmature071G→Aanti-stem−0.171G→Canti-stem4.3
MFE minimum free energy
ΔΔGS the MFE difference value between wild-type precursors and SNP-type precursors. The minus value indicated that the SNP-type precursors had lower structure energy than the wild precursors. Otherwise, the former had higher structure energy than the latter

      
      
        Validation of candidate miRNAs and miRNA-target pairs expression in the Jiuyuan black fowl
        In the present study, in order to explore the applicability of these identified candidate miRNAs on other native birds, we detected the expression of previously selected eight candidate miRNAs in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of Jiuyuan black fowl. Although the ratio between LP and HP chickens for each miRNA may be different, the expression pattern of most selected miRNAs in Jiuyuan black fowl is consistent with the high-throughput sequencing results of Luhua chicken except gga-miR-34c-3p shown no difference in pituitary and gga-miR-34b-3p shown up-regulated pattern in hypothalamus (Fig. 5b).
        In addition, we also validated the expression of four egg production-related miRNA-target pairs which were randomly selected from identified miRNA-target pairs of Luhua chickens using RT-qPCR in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of Jiuyuan black fowl. All four pairs showed significantly reciprocal expression patterns (Fig. 5c, d), consistent with the observation that miRNAs predominantly function to decrease target gene levels [56–58].
      
    
    
      Discussion
      The miRNA sequences we identified were generally close to 22 nucleotides in size, which is consistent with previous reports [59, 60], and the annotation of RNA distribution revealed that the clean reads were highly enriched and included a myriad of miRNA sequences. Correlation analysis revealed that the twelve samples have high repeatability in the same group and were obviously different in different group. In addition, abundant known and novel miRNAs are identified and predicted in the pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. By comparing HP and LP chickens, 46 known miRNAs and 27 novel miRNAs that are differentially expressed (P < 0.05) in the two tissues were found. Moreover, the RT-qPCR results provide evidence that Illumina small RNA deep sequencing is a sensitive and reliable approach to identifying differentially expressed miRNAs in chicken pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. In summary, all of the above results suggested that the deep sequence data are representative and reliable for the subsequent analyses.
      In pituitary and hypothalamic libraries, gga-miR-26a-5p (>12 M reads) and gga-miR-99a-5p (>5 M reads) were the most two frequently sequenced miRNAs. Despite the different read numbers in the two miRNAs, this result is consisted with our previous study [26]. miR-26a regulates tissue and cell growth and differentiation [61, 62] and has anti-apoptotic effects on many cancers [63–65]. mir-99a and mir-99b inhibit proliferation of c-Src-transformed cells and prostate cancer cells by targeting mTOR [66, 67] and were identified as novel targets in some important biological process, such as the TGF-β-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition [68]. Among other miRNAs, we found that the let-7 miRNA family was another abundant cluster with let-7f-5p being the most abundantly expressed miRNA. The let-7 miRNA family is abundantly expressed in bovines [69–71] and in murine ovaries and testis [72]. Furthermore, gga-miR-7, gga-miR-148a-3p, gga-miR-146c-5p, gga-miR-125b-5p, gga-miR-30d, gga-miR-153-3p and gga-miR-126-3p were abundant in our sequencing libraries and have been shown to occur in other animals [15, 69, 73, 74]. The significant biological functions of these miRNAs imply that they have important roles in the female reproductive physiology of chicken.
      In significantly differentially expressed miRNAs, some miRNAs play important roles in various aspects. For example, miR-138 [75–77], miR-29a [78–81], miR-490-3p [82, 83], miR-9-3p [84–86], and miR-135 [87–90] have pivotal roles in tumorigenesis and tumor progression by acting as tumor suppressors. miR-138 modulates the DNA damage response by repressing histone H2AX expression [91]. miR-490-3p [92] and miR-135 [93] as potential regulators of myogenesis also modulate the proliferation of muscle cells and are involved in skeletal muscle development. The important roles of these miRNAs and their significant expression pattern between LP and HP suggested that they might have important physiological roles in the process of chicken reproduction.
      Furthermore, we found eight significantly differentially expressed miRNAs in both tissues, including six known miRNAs (gga-miR-1684a-3p, gga-miR-1744-3p, gga-miR-34b-3p, gga-miR-34c-3p, gga-miR-122-5p and gga-miR-1434) and two novel miRNAs (gga-novel-367-mature and gga-novel-465-mature). Intriguingly, among the eight miRNAs, gga-miR-1684a-3p and gga-miR-1744-3p have the same expression pattern, and the remaining six miRNAs exhibited a contrasting expression pattern between the two tissues. We speculated the contrary expression pattern of these candidate miRNAs may be beneficial to the improvement of egg-laying in hens. In addition, miRNA target identification is important to explore the functions of the miRNAs. In the present study, in order to further explore the relationship between differentially expressed miRNAs and their predicted targets, we added a transcriptome analysis of pituitary and hypothalamic tissues to identify reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs. These successfully identified miRNA-target pairs suggested they have highly possibility to be related in the egg-laying process. This will provide a great convenience for future studies to functionally validate these miRNA targets. These miRNA-target pairs will also provide invaluable insights into candidate miRNAs and genes for reproductive traits and selective breeding of chicken.
      The miR-34 family was significantly differentially expressed between LP and HP chickens in the two tissues. The results were also presented in our previous study [26]. Compared with LP chickens, gga-miR-34b-3p and gga-miR-34c-3p exhibited a significant increase in HP pituitary tissues. In HP hypothalamus, gga-miR-34b (include 3p and 5p) and gga-miR-34c (include 3p and 5p) exhibited significant reductions. Previous studies reported that the mir-34 family was identified as a p53 target and a potential tumor suppressor to regulate processes, such as proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis and metastasis [94–100]. Some studies also observed that miR-34 can regulate age-associated events and long-term brain integrity to modulate aging and neurodegeneration in Drosophila [101]. In the present study, gga-miR-34 were significantly differentially expressed between LP and HP chickens, suggesting that gga-miR-34 has an important impact on reproductive process of hens. However, the contrary expression pattern between pituitary and hypothalamus tissues indicates that the different members of miR-34 family play different roles in the two tissues in the egg-laying process.
      In significantly enriched KEGG pathways, the most overrepresented pathways belonged to the metabolic pathways, such as glycerophospholipid metabolism, glycerolipid metabolism and butanoate metabolism. Some pathways associated with endocytosis, cancer, oocyte meiosis, focal adhesion, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, cutin, snare interactions in vesicular transport endocrine, other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption, dopaminergic synapse, GABAergic synapse and some signal transduction pathways, such as Renin-angiotensin system and GnRH signaling pathway, were all significantly enriched, indicating the role of the differentially expressed miRNAs in the regulation of cell motility, cell proliferation, the cytoskeleton, cell nutrition, nervous system development and function, communication between cells and the extracellular matrix. Moreover, the insulin signaling pathway was also enriched in our results. Insulin is the most potent anabolic hormone, mediating a wide spectrum of biological responses, including the synthesis and storage of carbohydrates, proteins and lipids and inhibiting their degradation and release back into circulation [102]. In addition, a small number of pathways involved in shigellosis, bacterial invasion of epithelial cells and hepatitis B suggested that the hens were involved in a stage of immune regulation. In general, the results indicated that these differentially expressed miRNAs were mainly involved in cell proliferation and development, signal transduction, metabolic and immune processes and nervous system development and function.
      In these KEGG pathways, a specific enrichment of predicted targeted genes was involved in some reproduction related pathways, such as ovarian steroidogenesis, oocyte meiosis and GnRH signaling pathways. Some of these genes play important roles in ovary development and the reproductive management of hens, such as FSHβ. FSHβ produces the pituitary glycoprotein hormone FSH, which plays a key role in the reproductive system of chickens, including steroidogenesis, folliculogenesis and follicular maturation [103]. In addition, the significance level of some reproduction regulation-related pathways in the hypothalamus were increased compared with pituitary tissues, such as GnRH signaling pathway and dopaminergic synapse, suggesting that the hypothalamic tissues play a greater role in reproduction regulation-related activities compared with pituitary tissues in hens. Moreover, we found that most identified miRNA-target pairs participated in reproduction regulation-related pathways, suggesting that these miRNA-target pairs were closely associated with high egg-laying performance in chickens. Also, these candidate miRNA and miRNA-target pairs were validated in Jiuyuan black fowl suggested the highly applicability of these egg production-related miRNA-target pairs in other chicken breeds. These identified miRNA-target pairs will provide an opportunity for early high egg-laying performance determination and to select individuals with rapid growth and disease resistance for breeding purposes. Thus, it is important for future studies to functionally validate these miRNA-target pairs. In addition, most of these miRNAs have not been reported their biological function. This information provides a guideline to explore their unknown roles in the reproductive management of hens.
    
    
      Conclusions
      The current study demonstrated that a diverse and dynamic set of miRNA is expressed in the pituitary and hypothalamic tissues during the egg-laying process in hens. By comparing miRNA expression between low and high rate of egg production chicken in each tissue, miRNAs with significant differences were screened as key factors to participate in the pituitary and hypothalamic reproduction regulatory mechanisms. A comprehensive analysis of the pituitary and hypothalamic microRNA transcriptomes was performed. Plenty of reciprocally expressed miRNA-target pairs were identified and randomly selected candidate miRNA and miRNA-target pairs were validated by RT-qPCR in Jiuyuan black fowl. This information will aid greatly in understanding the complexity of miRNA regulation at egg-laying stages of hens. Furthermore, previous reports demonstrated that chicken miRNA share a high degree of homology with other vertebrate species; therefore, knowledge of miRNA in chicken tissues will also assist in vertebrate development studies and enhance the understanding of the functions of miRNA and regulatory mechanisms of miRNA expression during vertebrate development.
    
    
      Additional files
      
        
Additional file 1: Figure S1.The egg production distribution of 800 Luhua birds at 300 days of age. Figure S2. The egg production distribution of 400 Jiuyuan black fowls at 300 days of age. Figure S3. Pie charts of small RNA percentages. Figure S4. Length distribution of small RNA in pituitary and hypothalamic libraries of LP and HP chickens. Figure S5. Correlation analysis of miRNA expression across samples of LP and HP chickens. Figure S6. Gene ontology statistics. The GO classification map includes the top 30 significantly enriched GO terms, which can be used to highlight significant differences in gene function. (PDF 1072 kb)
Additional file 2: Table S1.The main reproductive traits of the selected LP and HP samples. Table S2. Primer sequences for real-time PCR validation and SNP detection. Table S3. Overview of miRNA-seq data of all samples. Table S4. Identities of various RNA sequences in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S5. Expression profile of known miRNAs in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues of low- and high-rate egg production chickens. Table S6. Novel miRNAs expressed in pituitary and hypothalamus tissues of low- and high-rate egg production chickens. Table S7. The distribution of miRNA pairs in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S8. Differentially expressed miRNAs between low- and high-rate egg production chickens in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S9. The prediction of the differentially expressed miRNA targets in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S10. GO and KEGG pathway annotations for the miRNA targets in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S11. miRNAs and their predicted target genes involved in the regulation processes of reproduction. Table S12. Differentially expressed genes between low- and high-rate egg production chickens in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S13. The predicted miRNA-target pairs that are differentially and reciprocally expressed in pituitary and hypothalamic tissues. Table S14. The haplotype distribution and sequence variations in the selected miRNA precursors. (XLSX 1731 kb)

      
    
  
        
          Background
          It was recently reported that dairy cows fed a polyphenol-rich grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) during the transition period had an increased milk yield, but the underlying reasons remained unclear. As polyphenols exert a broad spectrum of metabolic effects, we hypothesized that feeding of GSGME influences metabolic pathways in the liver which could account for the positive effects of GSGME in dairy cows. In order to identify these pathways, we performed genome-wide transcript profiling in the liver and lipid profiling in plasma of dairy cows fed GSGME during the transition period at 1 week postpartum.
        
        
          Results
          Transcriptomic analysis of the liver revealed 207 differentially expressed transcripts, from which 156 were up- and 51 were down-regulated, between cows fed GSGME and control cows. Gene set enrichment analysis of the 155 up-regulated mRNAs showed that the most enriched gene ontology (GO) biological process terms were dealing with cell cycle regulation and the most enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways were p53 signaling and cell cycle. Functional analysis of the 43 down-regulated mRNAs revealed that a great part of these genes are involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced unfolded protein response (UPR) and inflammatory processes. Accordingly, protein folding, response to unfolded protein, unfolded protein binding, chemokine activity and heat shock protein binding were identified as one of the most enriched GO biological process and molecular function terms assigned to the down-regulated genes. In line with the transcriptomics data the plasma concentrations of the acute phase proteins serum amyloid A (SAA) and haptoglobin were reduced in cows fed GSGME compared to control cows. Lipidomic analysis of plasma revealed no differences in the concentrations of individual species of major and minor lipid classes between cows fed GSGME and control cows.
        
        
          Conclusions
          Analysis of hepatic transcript profile in cows fed GSGME during the transition period at 1 week postpartum indicates that polyphenol-rich feed components are able to inhibit ER stress-induced UPR and inflammatory processes, both of which are considered to contribute to liver-associated diseases and to impair milk performance in dairy cows, in the liver of dairy cows during early lactation.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12864-017-3638-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      The transition period spanning the time period between week 3 prepartum and week 3 postpartum represents the most critical period in the productive life of high-yielding dairy cows. With the onset of lactation, commonly a pronounced negative energy balance (NEB) is emerging due to the fact that feed intake is limited in this phase while energy demand is strongly increasing by milk production. NEB leads to a strong lipolysis of triacylglycerols (TAG) in adipose tissue, leading to the release of a large amount of non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) into the circulation [1]. Approximately one-third of the whole body NEFA-flux is taken up into the liver. As the capacity of the liver for β-oxidation of fatty acids is limited during this phase, a part of the NEFA is esterified to TAG. Thus, a pronounced NEB during early lactation undoubtedly is involved in the development of liver-associated diseases such as fatty liver and ketosis [2]. Newer studies have shown that, besides metabolic stress induced by NEB, the liver of early lactating cows is also exposed to diverse inflammatory challenges. The inflammatory challenges, which include microbial components, pro-inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species, typically result from infectious diseases, like endometritis and mastitis, but also from gastrointestinal disorders, like subacute rumen acidosis and abomasal displacement [3–5]. Both infectious diseases and gastrointestinal disorders frequently occur during parturition or the beginning of lactation. Due to of this, transition dairy cows develop an inflammation-like condition in the liver [4, 6]. Although this inflammation is mostly of subclinical nature, it is of great impact for health and performance of cows during early lactation [7].
      Recently, it has been found that metabolic and inflammatory stress induces stress of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in the liver of early lactating cows [8]. ER stress is defined as an imbalance between the folding capacity of the ER and the protein load. As a consequence, unfolded and misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER lumen, thereby, disturbing ER homeostasis [9]. It is known from studies in humans and rodents that this causes activation of an adaptive response, termed unfolded protein response (UPR). While the aim of the UPR is to rapidly restore ER function [9], chronic activation of the UPR, as observed in obese or diabetic rodent models or induced by application of chemical ER stress inducers, causes various hepatic symptoms similar to those observed in periparturient dairy cows. Therefore, it has been proposed that ER stress-induced UPR contributes to the pathophysiologic conditions commonly observed in the liver of periparturient cows, like fatty liver, ketosis or inflammation [10].
      Polyphenols are members of a large family of plant-derived compounds classified as flavonoids and non-flavonoids. Numerous studies in humans and rodents have shown that polyphenols are exerting antioxidative, antiinflammatory, cardioprotective, cancer chemopreventive and neuroprotective properties [11, 12]. In a recent study, we investigated the hypothesis that feeding grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME), an inexpensive byproduct of wine and grape juice processing rich in flavonoids, to dairy cows might attenuate inflammation and ER stress in the liver during the transition period [13]. In that study, cows fed GSGME during the transition period had an increased milk yield and had a reduced mRNA concentration of fibroblast-growth factor (FGF)-21, a stress hormone, in the liver at week 1 and week 3 postpartum. Relative mRNA concentrations of various hepatic genes of inflammation and ER stress in the liver were decreased by 20-50% in the cows fed GSGME in comparison to the control group. However, as mRNA concentrations of these genes were not statistically significant different between the two groups of cows, the effect of polyphenols on hepatic inflammation and ER stress remains unclear. As polyphenols are exerting a broad spectrum of metabolic effects [14–16], we hypothesized that feeding of GSGME might influence other metabolic pathways in the liver which could account for the positive effects of GSGME observed in cows during early lactation. In order to investigate this hypothesis, we used a genome-wide transcript profiling technique to explore changes in the hepatic transcriptome of cows supplemented with GSGME during the transition period. A main advantage of large-scale screening technologies like transcriptomics is that changes in the complete transcriptome can be assessed simultaneously, despite only small amounts of tissue, e.g. biopsy samples, being available. Using this technique in dairy cows has strongly increased understanding of the hepatic molecular adaptations occurring in the periparturient period [17–19]. Transcriptomics in combination with the analysis of selected blood metabolites and animal performance parameters facilitates to relate changes in the hepatic transcriptome to alterations of liver function during the periparturient period [17–19].
      Recently, a gene-based mapping and pathway analysis of metabolic traits in dairy cows figured out that hepatic genes of glycerophospholipid metabolism (e.g., lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 1) are closely linked to plasma concentrations of NEFA, β-hydroxybutyrate (BHBA) and glucose, three key factors of the metabolic status of dairy cows during early lactation [20]. Moreover, signaling lipids, such as ceramides, are implicated in pathways regulating inflammation [21, 22]. As polyphenols have been shown to exert pronounced effects on hepatic lipid metabolism, particularly under pathological conditions [23], we further aimed to find out whether feeding of GSGME could influence metabolism of glycerophospholipids and ceramides. Therefore, we performed a lipidomic analysis of plasma samples.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Animal experiment
        For this investigation, we used liver and plasma samples collected at 1 week postpartum of an experiment with dairy cows [13]. At this time point, both metabolic and inflammatory stress markers, such as plasma NEFA, plasma BHBA and hepatic mRNA concentrations of acute phase proteins (APPs), were increased most compared to later sampling time points (week 3 and week 5) in this study and another study [13, 24]. In this experiment, 28 Holstein cows with an average parity number of 2.8 were used as experimental animals. The experiment was conducted at the Educational and Research Centre for Animal Husbandry Hofgut Neumühle in Rhineland-Palatinate (Münchweiler an der Alsenz, Germany); the experimental protocol was approved by the Provincial Government of Coblenz, Germany (23 177–07/G12–20–074). The cows were assigned into 2 experimental groups, either a control group (n = 14) or a group supplemented with GSGME (GSGME group; n = 14), each consisting of 10 multiparous and 4 primiparous cows and having a similar average parity number (control group: 2.8, GSGME group: 2.9). In the period between week 3 prepartum and calving, a total mixed ration (TMR) was fed which was calculated to meet the demand of net energy (NE) and crude protein (CP) requirement of a dry cow with a BW of 650 kg and an assumed dry matter intake (DMI) of 12 kg/d, according to the German Society of Nutrition Physiology [25]. After calving, all animals were offered a basal TMR calculated to meet the demand of net energy and CP requirement for producing 34 kg of milk, with an assumed daily DMI of 22 kg [13]. Feed components were collected fortnightly and analyzed according to the official methods of Verband der Deutschen Landwirtschaftlichen Untersuchungs- und Forschungsanstalten [26]. The analyzed chemical composition of the TMR offered during dry period and lactation was in average of control and GSGME group as follows (per kg DM): 6.5 and 6.8 MJ NEL, 140 and 166 g CP, 383 and 356 g neutral detergent fiber. More details on the analytical composition of the TMR have been published recently [13]. In the time period from 3 week before the expected calving date until week 9 postpartum, the basal TMR of the GSGME group was supplemented with 1% of GSGME (Antaox, Dr. Eckel, Niederzissen, Germany) based on DM content. The GSGME product used had a total flavonoid content of 52 mg gallic acid equivalents per gram. The TMR of the control group was supplemented with 1% of wheat bran for an energetic adjustment. Although the NEL content of the GSGME used in this study was slightly lower (3.64 MJ NEL/kg DM [27]) than that of wheat bran (4.18 MJ NEL/kg DM) [28], the NEL content of the TMR between the two groups was nearly identical due to the small proportion of GSGME and wheat bran, respectively, in the TMR [13].
      
      
        Blood samples and liver biopsies
        Each cow was separated from the herd for blood sampling and liver biopsy procedure. Blood was taken from the vena caudalis at week 1 (day 7 postpartum ± 2 d) using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid-coated collection tubes (S-Monovette, Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany). Plasma was separated from blood cells by centrifugation, and the plasma samples were stored at −20 °C until analysis. Liver biopsies were taken after sampling of blood according to the protocol recently described [13] and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
      
      
        RNA isolation
        Total RNA was isolated from liver samples using Trizol according to the manufacturer’s protocol and stored at −80 °C. Prior to sample processing at the Centre of Excellence for Fluorescent Bioanalytics (KFB) at the University of Regensburg, the concentration and integrity of RNA was analyzed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent technologies, Böblingen, Germany). The total RNA concentrations, optical density A260/A280 ratios, RNA integrity number (RIN) values and starting total RNA amounts of all samples were 0.59 ± 0.08 μg/μL, 1.93 ± 0.03, 6.6 ± 0.5 and 3.8 ± 0.5 μg (mean ± SD, n = 12), respectively.
      
      
        Microarray hybridization
        For microarray analysis, six RNA samples each of the control group (n = 6) and the GSGME group (n = 6) were selected. The six RNA samples of each group consisted of five samples randomly selected from the multiparous cows and one sample randomly selected from the primiparous cows. Both groups had a similar average parity number (control group: 2.5, GSGME group: 2.3). Total RNA samples were processed according to the GeneChip WT Plus Reagent Kit (Affymetrix, High Wycombe, UK). In brief, total RNA was transcribed to first strand and second strand complementary DNA (cDNA). Then, complementary RNA (cRNA) was synthesized and amplified by in vitro-transcription of the second-stranded cDNA template using T7 RNA polymerase. After purification of cRNA and assessing cRNA yield and quality, single-stranded (ss) cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription of cRNA using 2nd-cycle primers. The ss cDNA was purified and checked again for yield and quality. The purified ss cDNA was fragmented and the fragmented cDNA labeled by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase using the Affymetrix proprietary DNA labeling reagent that is covalently linked to biotin. Finally, the labeled ss cDNA was hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip Bovine Gene 1.0 Sense Target array representing approximately 23,000 bovine transcripts. After hybridization arrays were washed and stained with the Affymetrix GeneChip Fluidics station 450. Finally, arrays were scanned with an Affymetrix GeneChip scanner 3000. The quality of hybridization was assessed in all samples following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The microarray data have been deposited in MIAME compliant format in the NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus public repository ([29]; GEO accession no. GSE86368).
      
      
        Microarray analysis
        After scanning the microarrays, cell intensity files containing a single intensity value for each probe cell were computed from the image data with the Affymetrix GeneChip Command Console Software. Background correction and normalization of probe cell intensity data was performed with Affymetrix Expression Console software using the Robust Multichip Analysis (RMA) algorithm. This algorithm is a log scale multi-chip analysis approach fitting a robust linear model at the probe level to minimize the effect of probe-specific affinity differences. Expression levels of transcripts are measured using log transformed perfect match values, after carrying out a global background adjustment and across microarray normalization [30]. The microarrays were annotated using the Affymetrix BovGene-1_0-st-v1_Probeset_Release 36 annotation file. Transcripts were defined as differentially expressed when the fold-change (FC) between GSGME group and control group was > 1.3 or < −1.3 and the P-value of the unpaired Student’s t-test (two-tailed distribution, two-sample equal variance) for each transcript was < 0.05. False discovery rates (FDR) according to Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction were also calculated. However, the FDR value was not applied as a cut off criterion, since the FDR-corrected P-values for all 23,000 transcripts were > 0.05.
      
      
        Bioinformatic prediction of mRNA targets of differentially expressed miRNAs
        Bioinformatic prediction of mRNA targets for differentially regulated miRNAs was performed using TargetScan release version 7.1 (http://www.targetscan.org/vert_71/) for the species “cow”. TargetScan predicts biological targets of miRNAs by searching for the presence of conserved 6 to 8mer sites matching the seed region of each miRNA [31]. In mammals, predictions are ranked based on the predicted efficacy of targeting as calculated using cumulative weighted context++ scores of the sites [32]. A cumulative weighted context++ score < −0.20 was used as cut off criterion for predicting mRNAs targets.
      
      
        Gene set enrichment analysis
        To extract biological meaning from the identified differentially expressed transcripts and predicted mRNA targets, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) with a modified Fisher’s exact test was performed in order to identify enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms within GO categories (biological process, molecular function, cellular component) and enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 6.7 bioinformatic resource [33, 34]. GO terms and KEGG pathways were defined as enriched if the FDR-adjusted P-value according to the Benjamini-Hochberg correction was < 0.05. GSEA was performed separately for the up- and down-regulated mRNAs and predicted mRNAs, respectively. The rationale of performing GSEA separately for the up- and down-regulated transcripts and not for all differentially expressed transcripts together is that results from GSEA are better to interpret, i.e. based on this approach it is assumed that biological processes or molecular functions and pathways identified as enriched within up-regulated genes are probably activated, whereas those enriched with down-regulated genes are likely inhibited.
      
      
        Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis
        Microarray data of 25 differentially expressed mRNAs were validated by qPCR. For qPCR analysis, total RNA from all cows (n = 14 per group) was used to generate cDNA by reverse transcription. The cDNA was synthesized using a Mastermix containing 1.2 μg of total RNA, 100 pmol oligo(dT)18 primer (Eurofins MWG Operon, Ebersberg, Germany), 1.25 μL dNTP mix (10 mM, GeneCraft, Lüdinghausen, Germany), 5 μL 5× RT reaction buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, St. Leon-Rot, Deutschland) and 60 units M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cDNA synthesis was carried out at 42 °C for 60 min and a final inactivating step at 70 °C for 10 min in a thermocycler (Biometra, Göttingen, Germany). The relative mRNA expression of genes was measured with a Rotor-Gene Q system (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) using KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Mastermix (Peqlab, Erlangen, Germany) and gene-specific primer pairs (Eurofins MWG Operon, Ebersberg, Germany) that were designed using Primer3 and BLAST. Primer characteristics of reference genes were recently published [13]. Primer characteristics of target genes are shown in Additional file 1: Table S1. Ct-values of reference and target genes were obtained using Rotor-Gene Q Software (Qiagen). For normalization of relative expression levels GeNorm normalization factor was calculated from the three most stable (beta-actin, peptidylprolyl isomerase A, ribosomal protein S9) out of six reference genes tested [35]. Raw Ct-values of reference genes were statistically analyzed to ensure that expression levels did not differ between groups. Raw Ct-values were transformed into relative expression values using the 2-ΔCt equation for the calculation of the normalization factors. The highest relative value of each gene was set to 1. From these values, the normalization factor was calculated as the geometric mean of expression data of the three most stable reference genes. Ct-values of target genes were also transformed into relative expression values using the 2-ΔCt equation and were normalized with the individual normalization factor resulting in relative gene quantities that were used for the statistical analysis. The mean normalized 2-ΔCt ratios of the control group was set to 1.0 and the mean and SD of normalized 2-ΔCt ratios of the GSGME group was scaled proportionally. PCR products were separated electrophoretically using a 1.5% agarose gel stained with GelRed nucleic acid gel stain (Biotium, Hayward, CA, USA) to confirm the expected size of the PCR products.
      
      
        Plasma concentration of acute phase proteins
        Plasma concentrations of bovine haptoglobin (HP) and serum amyloid A (SAA) were analyzed using commercial ELISA Kits (CSB-E08585b, CSB-E08592b, Hölzel Diagnostika, Cologne, Germany). The ELISA procedure was performed based on the instructions provided by the manufacturer and absorbance read in a microplate reader (Infinite® 200, Tecan, Mainz, Germany). According to manufacturer’s information, the limits of detection were 7.8 μg HP/L plasma for the HP ELISA kit and 50 μg SAA/L plasma for the SAA kit. All samples were measured in duplicate. Intra-assay coefficients of variability (CV) were < 10% for each sample in both assays. The average of individual CV was 5.8% and 3.7% for the measurement of HP and SAA, respectively.
      
      
        Lipidomic analysis
        Lipid extraction was carried out in the presence of non-naturally occurring lipid species as internal standards according to the protocol of Bligh and Dyer [36]. Determination of plasma lipid species was accomplished by means of direct flow injection electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) in positive ion mode as described in [37, 38]. For phosphatidylcholine (PC), lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), and sphingomyelin (SM) a precursor ion of m/z 184 was used [38, 39]. A fragment ion of m/z 264 was used to analyze spingosine based ceramides (Cer) and hexosylceramides (HexCer), while a fragment ion of m/z 369 was used for the analysis of free cholesterol (FC) and cholesteryl esters (CE) after selective derivatization of FC [38, 40]. Phosphatidylethanolamine species (PE) and phosphatidylinositol (PI) were analysed following neutral loss fragment of 141 and 277 Da, respectively [41, 42]. The analysis of PE-based plasmalogens (PE-P) with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 vinylether bonds was performed as described by Zemski-Berry [43]. Data analysis was performed with Mass Lynx software including the NeoLynx tool (Micromass) and results were exported to Excel and further processed by self-programmed Excel Macros [37]. Annotation of lipid species was carried out according to the LipidomicNet proposal for shorthand notation of lipid structures derived from mass spectrometry [44]. Glycerophospholipid species annotation was based on the assumption of even-numbered carbon chains only. Sphingomyelin species were assigned based on the assumption of a sphingoid base with 2 hydroxyl groups.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        Values presented in the text are means ± SD. All data were evaluated by Student’s t test using the Minitab statistical software (Release 13, Minitab Inc., State College, PA, USA). Multiple testing correction of microarray data was performed by Benjamini and Hochberg FDR.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Identification of differentially expressed transcripts
        To investigate the effect of GSGME on the transcriptome in the liver of dairy cows, we used a bovine microarray representing approximately 23,000 Bos taurus transcripts. Taking into account the criteria FC > 1.3 or FC < −1.3 and P < 0.05 a total of 207 transcripts were found to be differentially expressed in the liver between cows fed GSGME and control cows. Substantially more transcripts were up-regulated by GSGME (156), while only 51 transcripts were down-regulated by GSGME in the liver of cows. The up-regulated transcripts included 155 protein-coding transcripts (mRNAs) and 1 non-protein-coding miRNA, whereas the down-regulated transcripts included 43 mRNAs and 8 miRNAs. The 20 most strongly up- and down-regulated mRNAs are presented in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively. The FCs of the most strongly up-regulated mRNAs ranged between 2.91 and 1.90, while those of the most strongly down-regulated mRNAs ranged between −1.66 and −1.39. In Table 3 the differentially regulated miRNAs including FCs and P-values are shown.Table 1The 20 most strongly up-regulated mRNAs in the liver of cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) versus control cows at 1 week postpartumGene symbolmRNA descriptionFCa

P-valueTOP2Atopoisomerase (DNA) II alpha 170 kDa2.910.013CDKN3cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 32.640.010ARHGAP11ARho GTPase activating protein 11A2.610.029STMN1stathmin 12.570.015ECT2epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 oncogene2.530.023DEPDC1DEP domain containing 12.510.015CENPAcentromere protein A2.490.006CENPFcentromere protein F, 350/400 kDa (mitosin)2.450.017CKAP2cytoskeleton associated protein 22.390.024PRR11proline rich 112.320.036KIF11kinesin family member 112.250.007KIF20Akinesin family member 20A2.210.017BUB1Bbudding uninhibited by benzimidazoles 1 homolog beta2.200.004LOC618147histone cluster 1, H2ai-like2.170.002KIF4Akinesin family member 4A2.130.018LOC787465histone H2B type 1-like2.100.006GAS2L3growth arrest-specific 2 like 31.990.018SMC4structural maintenance of chromosomes 41.980.011SMC2structural maintenance of chromosomes 21.960.011RRM2ribonucleotide reductase M21.950.046CASC5cancer susceptibility candidate 51.930.029ESCO2establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 21.930.032HIST2H2BFhistone cluster 2, H2bf1.910.039HELLShelicase, lymphoid-specific1.900.013
aThe FC was calculated from the signal log ratios as follows: 2Signal log ratio if signal log ratio ≥ 0 and (−1) × 2–(Signal log ratio) if signal log ratio < 0. Signal log ratios were calculated from n = 6 microarrays per group
Table 2The 20 most strongly down-regulated mRNAs in the liver of cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) versus control cows at 1 week postpartumGene symbolmRNA descriptionFCa

P-valueGLCEglucuronic acid epimerase–1.660.036TBATAchromosome 28 open reading frame, human C10orf27–1.600.011MANFmesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor–1.590.014XBP1X-box binding protein 1, transcript variant 1–1.590.003LOC618817olfactory receptor, family 6, subfamily B, member 2-like–1.550.005SAA4serum amyloid A4, constitutive–1.540.043HSPA5heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (glucose-regulated protein, 78 kDa)–1.510.005GADD45Bgrowth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, beta–1.510.012WWC1WW and C2 domain containing 1, transcript variant 2–1.480.037LOC788587olfactory receptor, family 4, subfamily D, member 11-like–1.460.001SOCS3suppressor of cytokine signaling 3–1.450.042C15H11orf96chromosome 15 open reading frame, human C11orf96–1.440.018PHLDA1pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member 1–1.430.012SDF2L1stromal cell-derived factor 2-like 1–1.410.012IRX3iroquois homeobox 3–1.400.001LOC784679peptidylprolyl isomerase A (cyclophilin A)-like–1.390.023HYOU1hypoxia up-regulated 1, transcript variant 1–1.390.018ALX3ALX homeobox 3–1.390.010CFHR2complement factor H-related 2–1.390.028LOC520181olfactory receptor 5-like–1.390.007
aThe FC was calculated from the signal log ratios as follows: 2Signal log ratio if signal log ratio ≥ 0 and (−1) × 2–(Signal log ratio) if signal log ratio < 0. Signal log ratios were calculated from n = 6 microarrays per group
Table 3The most strongly differentially regulated (FC > 1.3 or FC < −1.3 and P < 0.05) miRNAs in the liver of cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) versus control cows at 1 week postpartumGene symbolmicro RNA descriptionFCa

P-valueMIR376CmicroRNA mir-376c1.400.027MIR365-2microRNA mir-365–2–1.310.010MIR2345microRNA mir-2345–1.330.007MIR2403microRNA mir-2403–1.340.029MIR2462microRNA mir-2462–1.390.006MIR2359microRNA mir-2359–1.410.002MIR2430microRNA mir-2430–1.510.004MIR2461microRNA mir-2461–1.530.010MIR365microRNA mir-365–1.560.003
aThe FC was calculated from the signal log ratios as follows: 2Signal log ratio if signal log ratio ≥ 0 and (−1) × 2–(Signal log ratio) if signal log ratio < 0. Signal log ratios were calculated from n = 6 microarrays per group

      
      
        Validation of microarray data for selected differentially expressed protein-coding transcripts by qPCR
        Validation of microarray data was carried out by qPCR analysis for 25 differentially regulated mRNAs. The transcripts to be validated by qPCR were randomly selected from the most strongly up- and down-regulated mRNAs. Since the number of transcripts up-regulated was higher than that down-regulated, we validated 14 up- and 11-down-regulated transcripts by qPCR. Table 4 shows that in the case of most mRNAs (19) the effect direction was the same between qPCR and microarray data, but the FCs from qPCR analysis were markedly lower than from microarray analysis. In the case of about half (9) of the differentially regulated mRNAs, qPCR analysis revealed a FC greater than the filter criterion for differential regulation in microarray analysis (>1.3 or < −1.3). In line with this, statistical analysis revealed that only 5 of these 9 mRNAs were differentially regulated according to qPCR analysis at a significance level of P < 0.05 (TUBB, PHLDA1) or at least P < 0.1 (KIF20A, SAA4, HYOU1). In the case of 15 mRNAs, the FC determined by qPCR analysis was below the filter criterion for differential regulation and the P-value was not significant (P > 0.05). In the case of one mRNA (HMMR) the effect direction determined by qPCR analysis (FC = −1.34) was contrary to that determined by microarray analysis (FC = 1.87. Regarding these partial inconsistencies between microarray and qPCR data (statistical results, effect size), three causative factors should be noted: 1) The number of biological replicates was different between microarray and qPCR analysis (n = 6 vs. n = 14) influencing the statistical power of the data. 2) For microarray analysis six cows (1 primiparous and 5 multiparous) were selected from the control group and the GSGME group each consisting of 4 primiparous and 10 multiparous cows. Due to this, the average parity number of the groups used for microarray analysis was slightly lower than of the groups used for qPCR. 3) The detection principle of transcript abundance differs between microarray and qPCR, i.e. for qPCR analysis a 100–250 bp sequence of the transcript is amplified by a single primer pair, whereas for microarray analysis up to 26 unique 25-mer probes are used for each transcript resulting in a high coverage across the entire transcript of up to 650 bp.Table 4Validation of microarray data for selected differentially expressed transcripts by qPCRMean FC
P-valueGene symbolMicroarrayqPCRMicroarrayqPCRSTMN12.571.370.0150.269ECT22.531.450.0230.246CENPA2.491.160.0060.514CENPF2.451.070.0170.788CKAP22.391.200.0230.557PRR112.321.930.0360.181KIF20A2.211.660.0170.088BUB1B2.201.220.0040.528RRM21.951.560.0460.263ESCO21.93–1.020.0320.905SPC251.88–1.190.0340.207CCNA21.87–1.070.0300.762HMMR1.87–1.340.0180.100TUBB1.851.380.0130.040GLCE–1.66–1.20.0360.195MANF–1.59–1.230.0140.235SAA4–1.54–1.310.0430.057SOCS3–1.45–1.140.0420.522PHLDA1–1.43–1.340.0120.006HYOU1–1.39–1.330.0180.081DNAJB11–1.37–1.230.0260.170BAG3–1.371.070.0320.674UAP1–1.341.050.0050.674CCNL1–1.33–1.260.0090.067CXCL14–1.31–1.160.0360.459The microarray FC was calculated from the signal log ratios as follows: 2Signal log ratio if signal log ratio ≥ 0 and (−1) × 2–(Signal log ratio) if signal log ratio < 0. Signal log ratios were calculated from n = 6 microarrays per group. The qPCR FC was calculated analogously from normalized 2-ΔCt ratios. Normalized 2-ΔCt expression was calculated from n = 14 samples per group

      
      
        Identification of enriched annotation terms associated with the differentially expressed protein-coding transcripts
        GSEA of the 155 up-regulated mRNAs showed that the GO terms with lowest FDR-adjusted P-values (most enriched) from all GO categories (biological process, cellular component, molecular function) were non-membrane-bounded organelle, intracellular non-membrane-bounded organelle, chromosome, cell cycle process, cell cycle, M phase, cell cycle phase, mitotic cell cycle, M phase of mitotic cell cycle, chromosomal part, microtubule cytoskeleton, mitosis, nuclear division, organelle fission, cytoskeletal part, cell division, spindle, microtubule-based process and cytoskeleton. Figure 1 shows the GO terms with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05 including the number of genes assigned to these terms separately for the GO categories biological process, cellular component and molecular function.Fig. 1The most enriched gene ontology (GO) terms assigned to the up-regulated mRNAs including the number of genes. The GO terms were sorted by their enrichment P-values (EASE score) (top: lowest P-value, bottom: highest P-value) within the GO categories biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Only GO terms with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05 are shown

        For the 43 down-regulated mRNAs GSEA revealed only three enriched GO terms with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05, namely ER lumen, ER part and ER. These GO terms belonged exclusively to the GO category cellular component.
      
      
        Identification of enriched regulatory pathways associated with the differentially expressed protein-coding transcripts
        To identify regulatory pathways associated with the differentially expressed transcripts GSEA was performed using the KEGG database. The most enriched pathways with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05 identified from the 155 up-regulated mRNAs included pathways regulating systemic lupus erythematosus and cell cycle, while no enriched pathways FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05 were identified from the 43 down-regulated mRNAs.
      
      
        Prediction of mRNA targets of the differentially expressed miRNAs and functional analysis
        As described above, several miRNAs were identified as differentially expressed by microarray analysis of the cow livers. In order to identify further protein-coding transcripts that are influenced by feeding GSGME in the liver of cows, we performed bioinformatic target prediction for the 9 differentially regulated miRNAs. Considering a cumulative weighted context++ score < −0.20, a total of 185 target genes were identified for the up-regulated mir-376c, and 2,412 target genes for the highly conserved down-regulated miRNAs (mir-2345, mir-2403, mir-2462, mir-2359, mir-2430, mir-365). Data including gene names, total and 8mer, 7mer and 6mer sites and cumulative weighted context++ score are shown in Additional file 2: Table S2.
        To elucidate the biological functions of the predicted target genes we carried out GSEA using GO category “biological process” and KEGG pathways separately for the targets identified for the up- and the down-regulated miRNAs. However, GSEA of the target genes of the up-regulated miRNA revealed no enriched biological process terms and KEGG pathways with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05.
        GSEA of the target genes of the down-regulated miRNAs identified the following enriched GO biological process terms (FDR-adjusted P-value < 0.05): intracellular signaling cascade, positive regulation of macromolecule metabolic process, positive regulation of macromolecule biosynthetic process, positive regulation of biosynthetic process, positive regulation of cellular biosynthetic process and positive regulation of transcription. No enriched KEGG pathways with FDR-adjusted P-values < 0.05 could be identified by GSEA of target genes of the down-regulated miRNAs.
      
      
        Plasma concentrations of acute phase proteins
        Plasma concentration of the positive APPs SAA and HP were decreased in cows fed the GSGME compared to the control group (P < 0.05; Fig. 2).Fig. 2Plasma concentration of a serum amyloid A and b haptoglobin in cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) and control cows at 1 week postpartum. Bars are means ± SD for n = 14 cows per group. Asterisk denotes difference between cows fed GSGME and control cows (P < 0.05)

      
      
        Plasma lipid profile
        Using lipidomic analysis, we were able to detect individual species of major (cholesterol, PC, SM, LPC) and minor (PE, PE plasmalogens, PI, ceramides) lipid classes in plasma samples of the cows. For all these lipid classes, there were no differences between the two groups of cows in the concentrations of any of the individual molecular species (P > 0.05, data are shown in Additional file 3: Tables S3-S9). Moreover, for all the lipids analyzed, the concentrations of species with no double bond (SFA), one double bond (MUFA) or two or more double bounds (PUFA) in the fatty acid moieties did not differ between the two groups of cows (P > 0.05, Table 5). In the PE plasmalogen fraction, there were moreover no differences in the concentrations of species with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 vinyl ether bonds between the two groups of cows (P > 0.05, Table 5).Table 5Plasma lipid profile of cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) versus control cows at 1 week postpartumLipid classGroupTotalSFAMUFAPUFA
Major lipid classes
 CE, μMControl3070 ± 663135 ± 38.8206 ± 57.02730 ± 574.7GSGME3079 ± 794131 ± 32.4204 ± 57.72743 ± 714.9 FC, μMControl411 ± 111---GSGME444 ± 124--- LPC, μMControl77.0 ± 20.255.6 ± 13.99.35 ± 3.2512.1 ± 4.05GSGME80.7 ± 21.257.4 ± 15.010.0 ± 2.7813.3 ± 4.18 PC, μMControl996 ± 28522.8 ± 5.80279 ± 91.8598 ± 164GSGME999 ± 29322.6 ± 5.96285 ± 87.0594 ± 181 SM, μMControl169 ± 46.1116 ± 27.544.4 ± 12.58.8 ± 6.0GSGME170 ± 52.2116 ± 33.144.2 ± 13.49.9 ± 6.0
Minor lipid classes
 Cer-d18:1, μMControl1.28 ± 0.241.11 ± 0.230.18 ± 0.04-GSGME1.28 ± 0.271.09 ± 0.230.19 ± 0.05- HexCer-d18:1, μMControl0.22 ± 0.050.11 ± 0.030.11 ± 0.02-GSGME0.23 ± 0.060.12 ± 0.040.12 ± 0.03- PI, μMControl9.65 ± 2.340.07 ± 0.012.02 ± 0.747.57 ± 1.68GSGME9.58 ± 2.890.06 ± 0.022.08 ± 0.767.44 ± 2.18 PE, μMControl6.36 ± 1.960.19 ± 0.070.99 ± 0.304.97 ± 1.66GSGME6.36 ± 1.640.17 ± 0.071.02 ± 0.254.95 ± 1.40 PE-P-16:0, μMControl6.73 ± 1.270.61 ± 0.051.01 ± 0.255.11 ± 1.06GSGME6.99 ± 1.690.59 ± 0.101.09 ± 0.295.31 ± 1.37 PE-P-18:0, μMControl4.09 ± 0.390.57 ± 0.060.70 ± 0.102.82 ± 0.27GSGME3.87 ± 0.520.51 ± 0.060.67 ± 0.112.69 ± 0.38 PE-P-18:1, μMControl4.48 ± 0.400.59 ± 0.040.77 ± 0.143.12 ± 0.29GSGME4.41 ± 0.640.56 ± 0.080.79 ± 0.133.06 ± 0.50Values are means ± SD for n = 14 cows per group

      
    
    
      Discussion
      Recently, we observed that feeding GSGME to dairy cows from 3 week antepartum to 9 week postpartum increases milk yield and causes some beneficial changes in mRNA concentrations of hepatic genes, such as reduced mRNA concentration of FGF21, an indicator of metabolic and ER stress [13]. As the reasons underlying these effects could not be elucidated in the recent study, the aim of the present study was to identify changes in potentially critical signaling or metabolic pathways by using transcriptomic and lipidomic analyses. For this end, we considered liver and plasma samples obtained at 1 week postpartum regarding that metabolic and infectious stress in dairy cows is greatest at this early time after birth [6, 8, 17].
      One striking finding of transcriptome analysis in the liver of cows was that within the limited number of protein-coding genes down-regulated by GSGME there was a large number of genes involved in ER stress-induced UPR, such as X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (HSPA5)/GRP78, homocysteine inducible ER protein with ubiquitin like domain 1 (HERPUD1), DnaJ (Hsp40) homolog, subfamily C, member 5G (DNAJC5G), calreticulin (CALR), protein disulfide isomerase family A, member 4 (PDIA4), DnaJ (Hsp40) homolog, subfamily B, member 11 (DNAJB11), pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member 1 (PHLDA1)/TDAG51, protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 3C (PPP1R3C), growth arrest and DNA damage inducible beta (GADD45B), BCL2-associated anthanogene 3 (BAG3), hypoxia up-regulated 1 (HYOU1) and mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF). This is interesting because we have recently reported that ER stress-induced UPR occurs in the liver of dairy cows during early lactation [8] as evident from induction of XBP1, HSP5A, HERPUD1, DNAJC3, PDIA4, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), protein kinase (RNA)-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), activating trascription factor 6 ATF6 (ATF6), ER degradation enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein 1 (EDEM1), ATF4, BCL2 antagonist/killer 1 (BAK1), BCL2 associated X, apoptosis regulator (BAX), caspase 3 (CASP3), CASP8, CASP9, CASP12, tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (WARS) and DNA damage inducible transcript 3 (DDIT3)/C/EBP homologous transcription factor protein (CHOP). In line with this, Loor [45] identified a large number of XBP1 target genes as up-regulated in the liver of dairy cows during the transition from late pregnancy to lactation. The significance of ER stress in the liver of dairy cows is its putative causative role in the development of liver-associated diseases in high-yielding dairy cows [10], which impairs metabolic function of the liver, overall health status, and productive and reproductive performance. UPR target genes encode proteins that mediate protective cellular responses aiming to reduce ER stress and restore ER homeostasis. Therefore, typical proteins encoded by UPR target genes, which were identified as down-regulated by GSGME, are chaperones (e.g. HSPA5, PDIA4, HYOU1, CALR) and co-chaperones (e.g. DNAJC5G, DNAJB1, BAG3), both of which are implicated in the refolding of proteins, and components of the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery (e.g. HERPUD1). The ERAD machinery is involved in the clearance of misfolded proteins that cannot be refolded in the ER and, therefore, are retrotranslocated to the cytosol, where they become degraded by the proteasome after being ubiquitinated by E3 ubiquitin ligases [46]. Down-regulation of these UPR target genes by GSGME is likely mediated by the identified down-regulation of XBP1. The spliced (s) XPB1 is a critical transcriptional regulator of ER stress response by inducing genes that cope with ER stress factors (ER chaperones, ERAD components) and stimulating phospholipid biosynthesis which leads to an expansion of the ER membrane [9, 47, 48]. Transcriptional regulation of ER stress-responsive genes by sXBP1 and other ER stress-sensitive transcription factors is mediated by binding to ER stress-dependent regulatory promoter motifs [e.g. endoplasmic reticulum stress element (ERSE)]. Functional ERSEs regulated by XBP1 were reported for the MANF and GADD45B genes [49], both of which were identified as down-regulated transcripts in the liver of cows fed GSGME. While GADD45B is localized in the mitochondria and is an activator of pro-survival p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, MANF is located in the luminal side of the ER and is proposed to help to remove misfolded proteins from the ER by degradation and/or enhancing protein folding [50]. Another ER stress-inducible protein identified as down-regulated by GSGME is PHLDA1/TDAG51, which encodes a protein promoting apoptotic cell death. Apoptosis is induced as consequence of ER stress in the case that ER stress-induced damage is overwhelming and homeostasis cannot be restored [51, 52]. The large proportion of ER stress-induced UPR target genes of total down-regulated transcripts was also reflected by GSEA, according to which ER lumen, ER part and ER were identified as enriched GO annotation terms.
      Noteworthy, the chemokine ligands C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 14 (CXCL14) and C-C motif chemokine ligand 3 like 1 (CCL3L1) were also identified as transcripts down-regulated in the liver of cows fed GSGME. These two chemokine ligands belong to a family of about 50 chemokines which as a common feature are key regulators of leukocyte chemotaxis, migration and function, thus playing fundamental roles both in physiological and pathological immune responses, including inflammatory processes [53]. Inflammation is also induced as a consequence of ER stress through IRE1-mediated activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) [9, 54]. NF-κB plays a key role in regulating the transcription of a large set of genes involved in all aspects of inflammation (e.g. chemokines, proinflammatory cytokines, inflammatory enzymes, adhesion molecules and various receptors) [55]. Thus, the observed down-regulation of inflammatory chemokines in the liver of cows fed GSGME is not only an indicator of inhibition of hepatic inflammation but likely also of inhibition of ER stress by GSGME. In line with the assumption of an inhibition of hepatic inflammation by GSGME is a further finding of transcriptome analysis that the APP SAA4 was one of the genes down-regulated by GSGME. Hepatic synthesis of APPs, like SAA, HP, ceruloplasmin, and C-reactive protein, is greatly induced during systemic inflammation [7] triggered by pro-inflammatory cytokines [56]. In line with the view that high-yielding dairy cows suffer from systemic inflammation in the days after parturition, several studies have demonstrated that APPs are elevated in blood of cows during this phase, even in the absence of clinical signs of disease [7, 57, 58]. Thus, in order to substantiate our observation from transcriptome analysis that GSGME is able to attenuate the acute phase response of the liver, we determined the concentrations of SAA and HP in plasma of cows. In fact, the concentrations of both APPs were reduced in plasma of cows fed GSGME confirming our assumption that GSGME inhibits hepatic inflammation.
      miRNAs were also identified as differentially regulated transcripts by GSGME in our transcriptome analysis and single miRNAs can regulate the expression of a large number of protein-coding target mRNAs, mainly at the posttranscriptional level. This is mediated by binding to complementary mRNA sequences, thereby causing their degradation or repression of protein translation, and, thus, inhibition of gene expression. Due to the great regulatory potential of miRNAs for regulating gene expression, we performed bioinformatic target prediction. Interestingly, the 185 target mRNAs predicted for mir-376c, which was up-regulated by GSGME, included several inflammatory chemokines, chemokine receptors, interleukins (ILs) and IL receptors [CCL15, CCL28, C-X9-C motif containing 4 (CMC4), CCR9, IL33, IL20RB]. Noteworthy, the target mRNAs predicted for mir-376c also included genes involved critically in the UPR including DDIT3/CHOP, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A (EIF2A) and the chaperone HSPD1. Although the predicted UPR target genes were not identical with the UPR target genes identified as differentially regulated, these findings strengthen our observation that GSGME causes down-regulation of ER stress target genes. Interestingly, CHOP is regulated by all branches of the UPR, in particular by ATF6, and is a powerful inducer of apoptosis during ER stress [59], while EIF2A encodes the initiator of protein translation eIF2α and inhibition of eIF2α phosphorylation in response to ER stress has long been known to be a cytoprotective mechanism, because inhibition of translation reduces global protein synthesis and thus work load of the ER [60]. Considering that mRNAs from up-regulated miRNAs are targeted for degradation and thus less transcribed, indicates that expression of genes involved in immune responses and critical genes of the UPR are inhibited by GSGME.
      Nevertheless, we have recently reported that hepatic mRNA abundances of UPR target genes determined by qPCR analysis, such as ATF4, BAK1, BAX, CASP3, DDIT3, EDEM1, HSPA5, PDIA4 and XBP1, are not different between cows fed GSGME and control cows [13], because statistical evaluation of these data indicated no significant effect. Despite this, it was particularly striking that qPCR analyses showed a marked and consistent reduction in the mRNA abundances of all UPR target genes by 44% in average of all genes (variation between 25–65%). In addition, our recent study revealed that GSGME causes a strong and significant down-regulation of FGF21 in the liver of these cows. FGF21 is an important metabolic hormone regulating fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis [61] and recent evidence indicated that FGF21 acts also as a stress hormone and is induced as a consequence of ER stress [62]. Thus, it is not surprising that FGF21 in the liver of dairy cows is dramatically induced during early lactation [63–65], because ER stress and various other stressors (negative energy balance, microbial pathogens) are present during the periparturient phase.
      In connection with our results from transcriptome analysis, we are confident to postulate that GSGME is able to inhibit ER stress in the liver of dairy cows. Although we have no direct evidence for this, it is possible that attenuation of ER stress and inflammation was responsible for an increased utilization of energy and nutrients in these cows as reported recently [13]. Immune system activation is an energy-demanding process that necessitates a reallocation of nutrients and energy from dispensable functions such as growth and production [7]. It is well known that even subclinical inflammation increases the requirement of energy and amino acids, e.g. for the production of APPs and moreover has adverse effects on metabolism, e.g. by an increase of plasma cortisol [6, 66, 67]. The hypothesis that milk production is increased by an attenuation of inflammation has been confirmed in several studies in which supplementation of dairy cows with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs during early lactation caused an increased milk yield [68–70]. The observed inhibition of ER stress and the parallel increase of milk yield by GSGME [13] is noteworthy regarding the relatively low amount of GSGME fed to the cows (1% of DM in the TMR). Other studies dealing with the effect of grape products in ruminants (cows or ewes) used markedly higher concentrations, such as 5 kg dried GM per cow and day [71], 10% grape residue silage of feed DM [72], and 300 g GS per ewe and day [73]. Despite the feeding of much higher amounts of grape products in these studies, only one study observed a slight improvement of milk yield compared to the control group [71]. However, none of these studies investigated the effect of grape products on ER stress and inflammatory signaling pathways, but on methanogenesis and intraruminal and total tract nutrient digestibility. Therefore, further studies dealing with the effects of grape products, with particular consideration of dose–response relationships, on ER stress and inflammatory pathways in the liver of high-yielding dairy cows during the transition period are required, in order to confirm potential beneficial effects of grape products on these pathways and to figure out the optimum supplementary dose.
      A further striking observation from transcriptome analysis was that the most enriched GO terms associated with the genes up-regulated by GSGME are dealing with cell cycle regulation, such as M phase, cell cycle phase, mitotic cell phase, microtubule cytoskeleton, mitosis, nuclear and cell division. This is due to the fact that many of the proteins encoded by the up-regulated genes, like topoisomerase (DNA) II alpha (TOP2A), cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3), stathmin 1 (STMN1), epithelial cell transforming 2 (ECT2), DEP domain containing 1 (DEPDC1), centromere protein A (CENPA), CENPF, CENPO, cytoskeleton associated protein 2 (CKAP2), kinesin family member 11 (KIF11), KIF20A, KIF4A, KIF20B, KIF15, BUB1B mitotic checkpoint serine/threonine kinase B (BUB1B), growth arrest specific 2 like 3 (GAS2L3), structural maintenance of chromosomes 4 (SMC4), SMC2, SPC25 NDC80 kinetochore complex component (SPC25), cyclin A2 (CCNA2), NDC80 kinetochore complex component (NUF2), β-tubulin (TUBB) and many others, have important biological functions within mitosis, cell cycle arrest, mitotic spindle organization, cytokinesis, mitotic chromosome condensation, metaphase/anaphase transition, chromosome organization, regulation of cyclin-dependent kinases and nucleosome assembly. For instance, KIF11, KIF20A, KIF4A, KIF20B and KIF15 encode proteins of the kinesin superfamily, a group of microtubule-dependent molecular motors. Proteins of the kinesin superfamily provide force for intracellular transport and cell division and are essential for mitosis and meiosis [74]. An important role during mitosis also plays topoisomerase IIα, encoded by the most strongly up-regulated gene TOP2A (2.9-fold), in resolving anaphase bridges between sister chromatids to ensure that daughter cells receive only one copy of each chromosome [75]. In this regard, centromer proteins, like CENPA, CENPF, CENPO, all of which were also up-regulated by GSGME, are localized to centromeric DNA, also called kinetochores, throughout the cell cycle and ensure correct chromosome attachment to the microtubules, equal segregation of sister chromatids, and their movement to the opposite poles [76]. Also in agreement with the observation that genes involved in mitosis and cell cycle are induced by GSGME is that several genes encoding histone proteins, which play a role for nucleosome assembly and thus affect chromatin structure, were up-regulated by GSGME. Although it is difficult to estimate the precise biological implication of an up-regulation of genes involved in mitosis or cell cycle regulation by GSGME in the context of early-lactating dairy cows, this effect might be explained, at least in part, by the well-described effects of different polyphenolic compounds contained in GSGME on cell cycle regulation and apoptosis, effects that are made responsible for the anti-cancer activities of many polyphenols [77]. For instance, quercetin [78], curcurmin [79], ellagic acid [80], epigallocatechin-3-gallate [81] and resveratrol [82] were found to induce the critical cell cycle regulator p53 and, subsequently, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in different cancer cells. On the other hand, induction of p53-mediated cell cycle arrest by polyphenolic compounds in normal cells allows complete repair of DNA damage before continuing with cellular division through p53-induced formation of different DNA repair proteins, like mutL homolog 1 and Rad51 recombinase [83, 84]. Due to the central role of p53 for cell cycle regulation and the large number of up-regulated genes involved in this process, it was not surprising to identify cell cycle as an enriched KEGG pathway.
      Besides their anti-inflammatory properties, pronounced effects of polyphenols on lipid metabolism have been reported. In rodent models, it has been shown that dietary polyphenols are able to lower plasma lipid concentrations and prevent the development of fatty liver by influencing several pathways of lipid metabolism, including inhibition of lipogenesis and activation of β-oxidation [23, 85]. In dairy cows, hepatic lipid metabolism is a physiological key aspect of health in dairy cows. It has been well established that disturbances of hepatic lipid metabolism, such as a low rate of β-oxidation and a limited capacity of the liver for the secretion of lipids into the blood are critical events in the development of fatty liver and ketosis [86, 87]. Recently, it has been observed that hepatic metabolism of glycerol- and ether phospholipids is closely linked to plasma concentrations of NEFA, BHBA and glucose, three key factors of the metabolic status of dairy cows during early lactation [20]. Imhashly et al. [88] recently showed, using lipidomic analysis of plasma, that concentrations of some unsaturated PC, LPC and SM species (such as PC 36:4, PC 36:5, PC 36:6, LPC 18:1, LPC 18:2, LPC 18:3, SM 39:1, SM 43:3) in dairy cows are continuously increasing after birth. A common feature of these phospholipids is their requirement for the secretion of hepatic TAG as very low-density lipoprotein particles. Thus, an increased formation and secretion of these phospholipids after birth has been regarded as a means of the liver to prevent accumulation of lipids [88]. In the present study, we observed that concentrations of all the individual phospholipids, and even their molecular species, in plasma of dairy cows in week 1 postpartum are not influenced by feeding GSGME. As the greatest part of plasma phospholipids is synthesized in the liver, this finding strongly suggests that phospholipid metabolism in the liver was not influenced by polyphenols from GSGME. The finding that fatty acid moieties of plasma phospholipids were also not changed in the group of cows supplemented with GSGME indicates that polyphenols also did not influence hepatic desaturation and elongation of fatty acids. This finding is of relevance as the fatty acid composition of phospholipids not only influences properties of cellular membranes [89], but certain phospholipid-bound fatty acids such as arachidonic acid are serving also as precursors for the synthesis of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids [90]. The finding that supplementation of GSGME did not influence the concentrations of free cholesterol and cholesterol esters indicates that polyphenols do not modify hepatic cholesterol metabolism. This finding agrees with our recent study which showed that GSGME does not influence hepatic cholesterol concentration [13]. Ceramide and ceramide-derived sphingolipids are structural components of membranes. In plasma, ceramides are transported as components of low-density lipoproteins of hepatic origin [91]. Ceramides are of physiological relevance as their plasma concentrations have been linked to insulin resistance, oxidative stress, and inflammation [22, 92–94], conditions which are commonly observed in dairy cows during the transition period. Recently, Rico et al. [91] have shown that overweight dairy cows have increased plasma concentrations of ceramides and these are closely linked with the progression of insulin resistance. These authors suggested that ceramides may have a fundamental role in the homeorhetic adaptation to early lactation in dairy cows. Our lipidomic analysis revealed that polyphenols from GSGME do not influence plasma concentrations and the molecular profile of ceramides in plasma. Thus, we conclude that beneficial effects of GSGME on inflammation and ER stress in the liver were independent of metabolism of ceramides.
    
    
      Conclusion
      The present findings from transcriptome analysis of the liver of cows fed GSGME during the transition period at 1 week postpartum indicates that polyphenol-rich feed components, such as GSGME, are able to down-regulate a large set of genes involved in ER stress-induced UPR and inflammatory processes. The observation that GSGME induces specific miRNAs, which are known to bind and thus degrade mRNAs encoding proteins of the UPR and inflammation, indicates that at least some of the GSGME effects on the hepatic transcriptome of dairy cows are mediated by miRNA-mRNA interactions. In contrast, transcriptome analysis of the liver of these cows did not reveal alterations in the expression of genes involved in important metabolic pathways, such as lipid metabolism. This finding is in agreement with our results from plasma lipid profiling demonstrating no differences in the concentrations of individual species of major and minor lipid classes between cows fed GSGME and control cows. Considering that both ER stress and inflammatory processes are considered to contribute to liver-associated diseases, which frequently occur during early lactation in high-yielding dairy cows, and to impair milk performance in dairy cows, it is likely that inhibition of ER stress and inflammation is responsible for the recently observed increase in milk yield of dairy cows fed GSGME.
    
    
      Additional files
      
        
Additional file 1: Table S1.Characteristics of gene-specific primers used for qPCR. (DOCX 17 kb)
Additional file 2: Table S2.Predicted mRNAs of the highly conserved differentially regulated miRNAs including gene names, total and 8mer, 7mer and 6mer sites and cumulative weighted context++ score. (DOCX 298 kb)
Additional file 3: Tables S3-S9.Concentrations of various lipid species in plasma (μM) of cows fed grape seed and grape marc meal extract (GSGME) and control cows at 1 week postpartum. (DOCX 45 kb)

      
    
  
        
          Background
          The ability to reliably identify the state (activated, repressed, or latent) of any molecular process in the tumor of a patient from an individual whole-genome gene expression profile obtained from microarray or RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) promises important clinical utility. Unfortunately, all previous bioinformatics tools are only applicable in large and diverse panels of patients, or are limited to a single specific pathway/process (e.g. proliferation).
        
        
          Methods
          Using a panel of 4510 whole-genome gene expression profiles from 10 different studies we built and selected models predicting the activation status of a compendium of 1733 different biological processes. Using a second independent validation dataset of 742 patients we validated the final list of 1773 models to be included in a de novo tool entitled absolute inference of patient signatures (AIPS). We also evaluated the prognostic significance of the 1773 individual models to predict outcome in all and in specific breast cancer subtypes.
        
        
          Results
          We described the development of the de novo tool entitled AIPS that can identify the activation status of a panel of 1733 different biological processes from an individual breast cancer microarray or RNA-seq profile without recourse to a broad cohort of patients. We demonstrated that AIPS is stable compared to previous tools, as the inferred pathway state is not affected by the composition of a dataset. We also showed that pathway states inferred by AIPS are in agreement with previous tools but use far fewer genes. We determined that several AIPS-defined pathways are prognostic across and within molecularly and clinically define subtypes (two-sided log-rank test false discovery rate (FDR) <5%). Interestingly, 74.5% (1291/1733) of the models are able to distinguish patients with luminal A cancer from those with luminal B cancer (Fisher’s exact test FDR <5%).
        
        
          Conclusion
          AIPS represents the first tool that would allow an individual breast cancer patient to obtain a thorough knowledge of the molecular processes active in their tumor from only one individual gene expression (N-of-1) profile.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13058-017-0824-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      There are many pathway analysis approaches that seek to determine whether a specific molecular process or cellular response is activated, repressed, or latent in a given patient sample including pathway level analysis of gene expression (PLAGE) [1], zscore [2], single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) [3], functional analysis of individual microarray expression (FAIME) [4], gene set variation analysis (GSVA) [5], Pathifier [6], N-of-1 [7] and diversity arrays technology (DART) [8]. To make predictions, all of these methods require a suitable database of gene signatures, where each signature is composed of a set of genes with expression levels that correlate with different activation states of the specific molecular process or biological response. Typically, these approaches return a score that measures the level of activation of the process or response.
      There are important limitations associated with these existing approaches. First, the vast majority (ssGSEA, GSVA, Pathifier, FAIME and DART) generate scores that are not easily interpreted in isolation. More specifically, the score for an individual pathway in a tumor must be interpreted relative to the distribution of scores for all patients in a large cohort. This is certainly problematic for situations where only the sample from the target patient is available without recourse to a large dataset of patients for interpretation, a scenario that often occurs in clinical investigations and in the clinic.
      Second, the relativistic nature of some of the existing methods makes them highly sensitive to the specific composition of the patient’s dataset [9, 10]. For example, scores for a given pathway in a specific patient will vary depending on the clinicopathological and molecular characteristics of the other tumors/patients in the dataset. This is analogous to the instability that was previously described for methods that determine breast cancer subtype when the fraction of patients with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive or HER2-positive cancer varies between datasets [9, 10]. Techniques such as N-of-1 [7] are potentially not as prone to these problems. However, they require both a normal and a tumor sample from the same patient, which is difficult to obtain and is not yet standard clinical practice.
      Ideally, a tool to measure the activation of a pathway via a gene signature should have the following four essential properties: (1) it should be applicable to gene expression profiles of single patients without recourse to or need for a larger cohort for comparative analysis; (2) the calls should be “stable”, i.e. predictions should not be influenced by the composition of a comparative patient cohort; (3) it should function across a large range of platforms (e.g. various microarrays and RNA-seq technologies); and (4) the prediction of the state of each gene signature in a patient’s tumor should be justified statistically. Unfortunately, to our knowledge, there is no approach currently available that meets all these four criteria.
      Here we present an approach entitled absolute inference of patient signatures (AIPS) that builds upon our previously described absolute intrinsic molecular subtyping (AIMS) method to predict the breast cancer subtype in a manner respecting the aforementioned properties 1–4 [9]. The absolute, stable and general properties of AIMS are generalized from markers of subtype classification to a large set of gene expression signatures representing an extremely diverse array of biological processes, pathways and functions, encompassing the hallmarks of breast and other cancers. The tool allows the molecular dissection of a single tumor for all relevant biological processes that are activated or repressed at the transcriptional level, and greatly extend the current technologies that measure just a single process (e.g. proliferation, immune-related information, etc.).
    
    
      Methods
      Supplemental methods are provided in Additional file 1.
      
        Testing the stability of current approaches for assigning pathway activation scores
        This analysis took advantage of the implementations of ssGSEA, PLAGE, zscore and GSVA in the GSVA Bioconductor package [5]. We restricted our attention to the 4725 gene signature in C2 (curated gene sets) from the MSigDB [11]. Using the complete Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) gene expression dataset (n = 1992), we assigned gene signature activation scores using one of the four approaches for all gene sets in the C2 collections to all patients in METABRIC. This produces a matrix MALL in which MALL (Pi,GSj) corresponds to the score assigned to patient Pi using gene set GSj. We repeated the score assignment a second time by applying the approach to only the ER-positive patients in the METABRIC dataset and obtained a second matrix of scores MER+ in which MER+(Pi,GSj) corresponds to the score assigned to patient Pi using gene set GSj. We repeated this analysis for the ER-negative patients to obtain a third matrix MER-. The distributions presented in Fig. 1a are obtained from the absolute difference between the MALL and MER+ or MER- matrix. For example, the distribution for the ER-positive patients are computed by |MALL(Pi,GSj) - MER+(Pi,GSj)| for all ER-positive patients and all the gene sets GSj.Fig. 1Instability of current pathway activation inference tools and example application of the region of independence (ROI). a Absolute difference between the score obtained from a specific pathway activation tool (gene set variation analysis (GSVA), single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA), zscore, or pathway level analysis of gene expression (PLAGE)) using all patients from the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) dataset, and the score obtained when this dataset is restricted to either estrogen receptor (ER)-negative (ER-) samples (left) or ER-positive (ER+) samples (right). b Heatmap depicts the ROI induced over the rank-sum-base ordering of patients in the METABRIC dataset using the estrogen activation gene signature from Doane et al. with the probability (1) and cumulative distribution function (2) for the random trials, in addition to the final assignments (3) into low, high and independent regions (defined as the 95% CI of the index of the random trials). c Distribution of the low, independent and high assignments defined by the ROI95 in the function of the clinical subtypes (defined by ER and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status). d Class assignments defined by the ROI95 are prognostic with 5 years survival (log-rank test P < 0.00001)

      
      
        Preparation of gene expression datasets
        We utilized the same training set as described in Paquet et al. [9] with the exception of the dataset of Loi et al., because after careful examination, this dataset was mainly composed of ER-positive samples and had evidence of batch effects with ER-negative samples (Table 1). Briefly, we generated the training set by downloading all of the original normalized dataset from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and ArrayExpress (Table 1). The normalized data are used directly for the region of independence (ROI)95 assignments (see Additional file 1 for a description of the ROI95), but as AIPS requires quantification of raw gene expression, we also downloaded the raw gene expression data and pre-processed them to remove background artifacts when applicable (mostly for the microarray platforms).Table 1Characteristics of the breast cancer datasets used in this studyDatasetTraining/validationPlatformNumber of samples
ER+
Her2+BasalL
Her2
E
LumALumBNormaLexpO Bittner M. (www.intgen.org)TrainingAffymetrix(U133 Plus 2.0)31265.7%28.1%21.2%16.3%31.4%18.9%12.2%Lu et al. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008 [40]TrainingAffymetrix(U133 Plus 2.0)12758.3%23.6%26.8%17.3%37.0%16.5%2.4%Li et al. Nat Med 2010 [41]TrainingAffymetrix(U133 Plus 2.0)11560.9%31.3%27.0%16.5%36.5%18.3%1.7%Parker et al. J Clin Oncol 2009 [25]TrainingAgilent22658.2%12.4%31.0%12.4%33.2%16.4%7.1%Curtis et al. Nature 2012 (METABRIC) [13]TrainingIllumina(HT-12 v3)199276.2%12.5%20.5%16.0%26.7%22.8%14.0%Guedj et al. Oncogene 2012 [42]TrainingAffymetrix(U133 Plus 2.0)53775.9%13.0%16.2%17.1%24.8%24.2%17.7%TCGA Nature 2012 [23]TrainingAgilent23379.3%21.9%22.3%15.5%30.9%21.0%10.3%Miller et al. PNAS 2005 [43]TrainingAffymetrix(U133AB)25186.2%13.1%15.9%18.3%25.1%20.3%20.3%Pawitan et al. Breast Cancer Res 2005 [44]TrainingAffymetrix(U133AB)159N/A13.8%12.6%13.8%28.3%27.7%17.6%TCGA Nature 2012 [23]TrainingRNA-seq(Illumina)55877.9%24.2%19.2%12.9%30.5%22.2%15.2%McGill [12]ValidationAffymetrix Gene ST42978.1%18.5%20.5%17.4%37.6%16.2%8.1%TCGA Nature 2012 [23]ValidationRNA-seq(Illumina)31372.6%11.9%19.2%13.4%35.8%15.3%16.3%
ER+ estrogen-receptor-positive, Her2+ human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive, BasalL basal-like intrinsic subtype, Her2E Her2-enriched intrinsic subtype, LumA luminal A intrinsic subtype, LumB luminal B intrinsic subtype, NormaL normal-like intrinsic subtype, RNA-seq RNA sequencing, METABRIC Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium, TCGA The Cancer Genome Atlas

        The McGill validation dataset was generated on the Human Affymetrix Gene ST platform as previously described in Tofigh et al. [12]. For the METABRIC dataset we kept the 12 replicate samples described by the authors of the original publication [13]. As these correspond to less than 0.2% of our training set, their inclusion does not significantly affect any of the presented results. The final analyses and models were restricted to the Entrez IDs present on all the platforms in the training and validation datasets. When multiple probes map to the same Entrez ID, the ROI95 assignments used the most variable probe (using the interquartile range (IQR)). Unfortunately, the AIPS models cannot rely on such an approach because the assignments must be performed in the context of only a single sample. Therefore, the IQR cannot be used. The AIPS models used the probe with the highest raw gene expression in downstream analyses. We favored this solution over taking the mean of all probes because we believe that using the mean would bias the approach by favoring genes with more probes, as they would have less variance. On the other hand, it could also introduce noise because we cannot really expect all the isoforms of a gene to have similar levels of expression.
      
      
        Assembling a large collection of harmonized gene signatures
        We collected 6466 gene signatures from different sources including MSigDB (C1 to C7, n = 6183 [11]), GeneSigDB (n = 188, [14]), and breast-cancer-specific gene signatures obtained from the literature (n = 95). The number of signatures from each source is depicted in Fig. 2a. Entrez IDs were used in order to guarantee distinct, unambiguous gene names, identifications and symbols. As best possible, we determined the “directionality” of expression for each gene within each signature, and used this information to partition the genes into the overexpressed and underexpressed subsets.Fig. 2Selection of the informative list of 3472 gene signatures. a Distribution of the number of genes per signature and overall number of signatures from each sources of signatures. b Distribution of the proportion of patients assigned to the low, independent and high classes by the region of independence (ROI)95 computed for all signatures and obtained after random permutation of gene labels over the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) dataset. c Percentage of informative signatures for each of the different sources

      
      
        Development of AIPS
        The pipeline to generate AIPS models is summarized in Fig. 3a and contains two major steps: winnowing to informative gene signatures in breast cancer, followed by the selection of reliable absolute models.Fig. 3Generation and validation of the absolute inference of patient signatures (AIPS) models. a Pipeline used for the development of AIPS: (1) using our curated list of 6466 gene signatures, we used the region of independence (ROI)95 to obtain assignments in the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) dataset; (2) using a cutoff of 80% for the percentage of independent patients we selected the informative gene signatures (GS); (3) we obtained a list of 3472 informative gene signatures; (4) using the 4510 samples in our training set and the 3472 informative gene signatures we obtained the gold standard assignments for the training set; (5) using an approach similar to absolute intrinsic molecular subtyping (AIMS) (Paquet et al.) we trained 3472 absolute models mimicking the 3472 informative gene signatures; (6) we selected the final list of models that constitute AIPS by requiring significant agreement with the ROI95 assignments in all the individual datasets present in the training set; and (7) we validated the final list of 1733 AIPS models in the validation set. b Distributions of the kappa statistics for the selected 1733 models forming AIPS (green) and the 1739 models not forming AIPS (gray) in the entire training set (using the median of the individual training sets), the individual training sets, and the validation set. c Heatmaps depict the percentage of samples of a given class obtained from the ROI95 (e.g. low, independent (ind.), or high) assigned to another class by AIPS in the training and validation sets. d Number of genes utilized in the ROI95 versus the AIPS models. e The ROI95 example for an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signature from MSigDB in the McGill validation dataset. AIPS assignments are presented at the top of the heatmap. f Heatmap ordered using the Euclidean distance and the Ward’s linkage method presenting the different rules utilized in the AIPS-EGFR models (red means the rule is true and white means the rule is false). Underlined genes in rules marked by a star are enriched in genes upregulated by EGFR in MCF7 cell lines [22]. g Confusion matrix representing the agreement between the single sample AIPS-EGFR model and the whole-cohort ROI95 assignments. h Confusion matrix representing the agreement between the AIPS-EGFR assignments performed on the same RNA extraction but different platforms (RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) versus microarray). i Boxplots depicting the distribution of the percentage of agreement for the AIPS partitions done on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) samples profiled on both microarray and RNA-seq. We also present a background distribution generated from shuffling the labels 100 times. ER estrogen receptor, HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, PAM50 prediction analysis of microarray 50

      
      
        Winnowing to informative gene signatures in breast cancer
        The numbers refer to Fig. 3a.We applied the ROI95 on the 6466 gene signatures in our collection using the largest of our gene expression datasets (METABRIC, n = 1992). The size of the dataset helps to ensure that the ROI95 will have sufficient samples to precisely identify the region of independence (see Additional file 1 for a description of the ROI95)To estimate significance, we also performed the same analysis but first randomly permuted the genes in the METABRIC dataset prior to applying the ROI95. In this manner, we are able to identify those gene signatures that behave essentially like random gene signatures. For every gene signature in the non-permuted versus permuted dataset we generated distributions from the percentage of patients assigned to the low, independent or high classes (Fig. 3b)We selected a value of 0.8 to apply to the percentage of patients in the independent class as a cutoff to filter out non-informative gene signatures. This conservative cutoff still induces a sufficient number of patients within each of the three classes (low, independent, and high) to enable training of our models. A 0.8 cutoff on the percentage of independent assigned patients for a given signature retains 3472 gene signatures, which we consider to be informative in breast cancer (Fig. 2c).

      
      
        Building and selecting reliable absolute models from the informative gene signatures
        
(4)Our gene expression training set consists of 4510 patients across different datasets generated via six different technological platforms (Table 1). The ROI95 was applied to each signature on each individual normalized dataset in the training set. Variability in the patient composition across the different datasets (e.g. heterogeneity in receptor status or other clinical variables; Table 1) and the diverse range of platforms in our training set rules out an approach that builds a merged normalized meta-dataset(5)Step (4) provides statuses (low, independent, and high) for 3472 signatures in each of 4510 patients. A model is learnt for each such signature as follows. First, we consider every possible pair of genes x and y in the expression dataset, and we ask how strongly the rule “if expression of x is greater than y, then classify signature as high” is associated with the ROI95 assignments. This is repeated for a modification of the rule where x is less than y, and for the other activation statuses of independent and low. This process is performed on the entire training set and weights are assigned to every patient in a way to give equal weight to the individual datasets i.e. patients from smaller datasets are given more weight than patients from larger datasets. Then, for each signature, the K most highly associated rules are chosen from the ranked list of all possible gene pair rules. The optimal number of rules K is chosen using 10-fold cross-validation for each model. The final K rules are combined into a single probabilistic model via a naive Bayes’ classifier(6)Following the generation of models corresponding to absolute versions that mimic the ROI95 in step (5), we remove those models that do not achieve sufficiently high agreement with the gold standard ROI95 (Bonferroni-adjusted P value <0.05 on kappa statistics, Fig. 3b). Given the fact that many or most of the gene signatures in our database were constructed in contexts outside of breast cancer or cancer in general, there is no reason to expect all gene signatures to be informative and to induce good absolute models. After this filtering, we have 1733 absolute models that well mimic the ROI95 gold standard in the training set. This set constitutes the final version of AIPS.(7)The final list of 1733 models (AIPS) was applied to the validation set and their agreement compared to the agreement in the training set (Fig. 3b).

      
      
        Kallisto and RSEM on single RNA-seq profiles
        We used Kallisto version 0.42.4, RSEM version 1.2.15 and bowtie2 version 2.1.0. We ran Kallisto on the ensembl transcripts build provided on the Kallisto website (Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.rel79.cdna.all.fa) using the command “kallisto quant -i Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.rel79.cdna.all.idx --plaintext”. We ran RSEM on the UCSC hg19 gene annotation (2014-06-02) using rsem-calculate-expression in paired-end mode.
      
      
        Statistical analyses
        All the statistical tests performed in this study are two-sided. For the log-rank test and survival analyses we used the package “survival” in R version 2.15. For analysis of Cohen’s kappa statistics and the significance we used the implementation available in the “fmsb” R package. All the visualizations were performed using custom R scripts.
        We ran the survival analyses for the 1733 AIPS models on different cohorts of patients defined using either the molecularly defined subtype or the clinically defined subtypes. We also ran association analyses to study the association between the clinical and molecular subtypes and the low, independent, and high partitioning obtained from AIPS. For the proliferation score we used the Kruskal–Wallis test to evaluate the association with AIPS partitioning. We combined the P values obtained from both the survival analyses and and analyses of association using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to obtain a final false discovery rate (FDR). We considered an event to be significant with FDR <5%.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Current single sample pathway assignment tools are unstable
        The currently available tools including PLAGE [1], z-score [2], ssGSEA [3], and GSVA [5] infer activation scores for a given patient relative to a large cohort of patient profiles. We asked if, and to what degree, scores determined in this relativistic manner, were affected by perturbations to the composition of patients in the comparative dataset. Towards this end, the activation of gene signatures from MSigDB C2 (literature curated) [12] were measured using the METABRIC dataset [13] in three distinct ways: using (1) patients with only ER-positive samples, (2) patients with only ER-negative samples, and (3) all patients. Figure 1a depicts the distribution of the absolute differences between the activation scores obtained by each tool using only ER-positive samples versus the scores obtained for all patients from METABRIC. This is repeated to compare ER-negative-specific scores versus all patients from METABRIC.
        We observed a significant difference in the inferred activation score for all of the tested approaches (Wilcoxon’s P value < 0.0001 for all), with the largest differences observed for the ER-positive versus pan-METABRIC comparisons (Fig. 1a). Although the scores obtained from the four tools are incomparable, the results show that scores are influenced by perturbations in the patient composition of the dataset, establishing that none of these current approaches are absolute [9]. Analogous results were obtained when the dataset was stratified by HER2 status and grade (Additional file 2: Figure S1), suggesting that many clinicopathological factors may influence pathway activation tools in this manner. Concretely, if those approaches were to be used in a clinical context, conclusions about the activation status of any given pathway would be greatly influenced by the comparative “control” group used by the treating clinician.
      
      
        A simple method to measure signature activation
        The instability described above is analogous to what we and others have previously reported in the context of bioinformatics tools such as prediction analysis of microarray 50 (PAM50) that infer breast cancer subtype from gene expression profiles [9, 10]. In our previous work (AIMS), we developed a so-called absolute method that used only a gene expression profile from the target patient without recourse to or need of a larger compendium of patient profiles for comparative analysis [9]. Our goal here is to generalize and improve this framework to allow such absolute assignments to be made for any given molecular pathway or process for which there is a suitable gene signature.
        The construction of our tool requires several components: (1) a collection of gene signatures that cover relevant biological processes including the hallmark molecular pathways/processes of breast cancer; (2) a suitably large collection of gene expression profiles of clinical breast cancer samples (ideally generated via both microarray and RNA-seq technologies) partitioned into training and validation datasets; and (3) a “gold standard” set of positive and negative patient profiles for each pathway with known activation status.
        With respect to (1), we curated a collection of 6466 gene signatures from various databases of gene signatures including MSigDB [11] and GeneSigDB [14], which we complemented with our own in-house work to curate gene signatures especially applicable to breast cancer (n = 188, see “Methods” and Fig. 2a). With respect to (2), our training dataset comprised 4510 gene expression profiles obtained from 10 different cohorts on six different platforms (Table 1). We used our previously published dataset for validation (Affymetrix Gene ST, n = 429 patients [12]) and the most recent RNA-seq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project (Table 1). We next describe how we estimate our gold standard.
      
      
        Estimation of the activation levels of each gene signature
        Our goal is to train our AIPS algorithm to accurately infer the activation status of a given pathway within an expression profile of a patient. In order to train our algorithm, we require examples of patients that have activation statuses that we believe to be correct for each gene signature of interest. Furthermore, the examples must cover all possible states (e.g. high, low, and latent activation). The nature of human clinical samples, however, does not allow us to determine the activation status of a pathway in a direct, rigorous manner. Therefore our gold standard learning set must be comprised of estimations of statuses across the relevant expression datasets (item (2) as mentioned previously).
        For each biological process of interest (item (1) as mentioned previously), we applied a de novo non-parametric rank-based method that partitions the patients in our dataset into three classes depending on the pattern of expression exhibited by the genes within the signature. The three classes correspond to those patients that appear to have high activation of the signature, low activation of the signature, and a set of patients where the expression of the genes within the signature lose their characteristic pattern of pairwise correlation (Fig. 1b provides an example). The latter class is assigned to patients where the corresponding gene expression patterns are pairwise independent, thus supporting neither high nor low activation of the underlying pathway.
        This de novo non-parametric test, referred to as the ROI at quantile q (ROIq), proceeds as follows. In a univariate fashion, each gene within a given signature is used to rank all patients from the lowest to the highest expression. In some cases, the direction of expression of each gene within the signature is known a priori (e.g. the gene is overexpressed or underexpressed in samples with activation of the target pathway). Before ranking, we first negate any expression measurements for genes that are known to be underexpressed: such genes that are negatively correlated with activation of the signature, order the patients in the reverse order. Now for each patient, the ranks of all k genes from the signature are summed (see Additional file 1 for full details). The patients are then linearly ordered from the lowest to the highest rank. The approach of mapping expression data to a linear order, which has been used previously in breast cancer [15], makes intuitive sense as we can view the expression of each molecular process or pathway as having a state between “turned off” and “turned on” completely. Figure 1b depicts a proof-of-concept linear ordering for an estrogen response signature from Doane et al. [16] using the METABRIC dataset (Table 1). Broadly speaking, such linear orders highlight patients at the left hand side that have low or negative expression of the signature, patients at the right hand side that have high or positive expression of the signature, and a region in the middle corresponding to patients with gene expression patterns that are independent. We refer to this as the observed linear order.
        The second step in the ROIq procedure identifies the left and right boundaries of the low and high regions within the observed linear order. This is done via a permutation test where an “artificial” patient “n + 1” is created. Each of the k genes in the signature rank patient n + 1 with a uniformly randomly chosen number from (0… n + 1). Summing the randomized rank over all k genes in the signature, the position of patient n + 1 is computed within the observed linear order. This is repeated a suitably large number of times (e.g. n = 10,000). The ROIq is defined as the region that contains q% of the randomly generated samples (Fig. 1b bottom and see Additional file 1).
        As expected, the patient ordering at ROI95 for the estrogen response signature depicted in Fig. 1b is strongly associated with breast cancer subtype as defined by ER and HER2 status. In particular, the low activation region of the ordering (left) is enriched for ER-negative and/or HER2-positive tumors (Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.000001, Fig. 1b, c), whereas the high activation region corresponds almost exclusively to ER-positive/HER2-negative tumors (Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.000001, Fig. 1b, c). Given that ER-positive status is strongly associated with good outcome in breast cancer [12, 17, 18], the patient partition produced by the ROI95 is strongly prognostic (log-rank P < 0.0001, Fig. 1d). Although only a single proof of concept example, the results suggest that the ROIq approach is capable of assigning pathway activation in breast cancer expression datasets. A more thorough investigation of the ROI95 is presented in Additional file 1. The analyses suggest that the ROI95 approach can faithfully recapitulate the low, independent, and high partitions of patients over a large range of biologically plausible parameters. For example, using simulated data, we tested the impact of several parameters including, for example, the gene signature size, fraction of patients in each category, and the strength of the signal on the capacity of the ROI95 approach to correctly assign patients in the low, independent, and high categories. We confirmed using this simulated set of data that the ROI95 is a robust approach within a wide range of parameters (see Additional file 1 and Additional file 2: Figure S2 and S3).
      
      
        Identification of informative and non-informative gene signatures
        To better ensure that the ROI95 is accurately determining pathway status, we applied the method to all gene signatures in our collection (n = 6466, Fig. 2a) using the METABRIC dataset (n = 1992). The fraction of low, independent, and high samples across all signatures in our collection is presented in Fig. 2b. As a control, the gene labels of the METABRIC dataset were randomly permuted. This procedure should, with high probability, break the vast majority of gene-gene correlations within signatures, causing the fraction of uninformative genes to rise. We should then observe an increase in the independent partition of the ROI95 with a concomitant decrease in the size of the low and high partitions. The results depicted in Fig. 2b confirm this, and suggest that for a large proportion of the signatures, the ROI95 method is indeed assigning activation status in a very non-random fashion.
        The results depicted in Fig. 2b also suggest that the ROI95 method assigned almost every patient to the intermediate partition for some signatures. In other words, the ROI95 method applied to these specific gene signatures was not distinguishable from random expression patterns. We removed all such gene signatures from further consideration, in particular, a gene signature was removed when the fraction of samples in the ROI95 region exceed 0.8, as this is no better than partitions generated by random sampling. This led to a list of 3472 signatures that we considered informative in the context of breast cancer. A cutoff on the ROI95 region will exclude gene signatures activated or repressed in less than 20% of samples. Although more liberal thresholds could be used when studying an individual gene signature, we chose this conservative threshold here to enable our high-throughput global analyses.
        Given that our gene signatures were collected from various sources, we asked whether any particular source was enriched for uninformative signatures. Of the remaining informative signatures, pathway databases such as BioCarta, Kyoto Encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) have higher fractions of signatures that have near random behavior (bottom of Fig. 2c). We note that sources that contributing signatures from transcriptional profiling have a higher proportion of non-random signatures (top of Fig. 2c).
      
      
        Absolute single-sample gene signature activation in breast cancer
        Based on the aforementioned results, we used the ROI95 method with the 3472 informative signatures to the training and validation datasets for calling signature activation levels using only the expression profile of a given single patient. The approach used here broadly follows our AIMS method that infers breast cancer subtype (Fig. 3a; also [9]).
        First, the ROI95 is applied to each informative signature across 10 expression datasets generated from several microarrays (one-color and two-color) and RNA-seq platforms totaling 4510 samples (Table 1). This large and diverse training dataset provides us with more confidence that biases for specific clinicopathological or other patient variables are ablated, or at least reduced [9]. Our learning set consists of activation statuses (low, independent, and high) for 3472 signatures in each of 4510 patients from the training set.
        Now, for each signature a model is learnt as follows. First, we consider every possible pair of genes x and y in the expression dataset, and we ask how strongly the rule “if expression of x is greater than y, then classify signature as high” is associated with our gold standard learning set. This is repeated for a modification of the rule where x is less than y, and for the other activation statuses of independent and low. Then, for each signature, the K most highly associated rules are chosen from the ranked list of all possible gene pair rules. The K rules are combined into a single probabilistic model using a naive Bayes’ classifier, and validated on an independent dataset (n = 742 samples, Table 1) [12].
        The last step of our approach consists in selecting only those models with strong agreement with the ROI95 approach using a cutoff of 0.05 on the Bonferroni adjusted Kappa’s statistics P value. The two filtering steps that consist of first filtering out non-informative gene sets and then keeping models with significant agreement are essential to provide a set of reliable models (Fig. 3a).
      
      
        Approximately 50% of informative signatures are amenable to absolute assignment
        To ensure that our models are applicable across different technologies, we only retained models that significantly agreed with the gold standard in all 10 of the training datasets (kappa statistics Bonferroni-adjusted P value <0.05). This resulted in the retention of 1733 models (1733/3472, approximately 50%). We observed that the retained models had better agreement with the gold standard in the validation dataset in comparison with the models that were removed (Fig. 3b). This observation suggests that our training procedure did not introduce any significant over-fitting as selected models behave similarly in the training and validation sets and also all the models obtain a significant kappa statistic in the validation set (kappa statistics P values <0.01 for all).
        We also stress here that the validation dataset contains data generated on a microarray platform (Affymetrix Gene ST) not present in the training dataset, suggesting that AIPS assignments are applicable on technologies not utilized in the training procedure. AIPS correctly assigns activation status for samples either assigned low or high activation (mostly red (approximately 80%) for the low-low and high-high lines in Fig. 3c). About 60% of samples were assigned to the independent class over all the 1773 models,
        For the samples in the gold standard that were assigned independent status, AIPS correctly assigned this status in 60% of the cases, suggesting that predictions made for samples in the independent class are generally less reliable than predictions made for the low or high classes (mostly yellow for the “ind.-ind.” tagged line in Fig. 3c). Importantly, we rarely observed cases were AIPS predicted high activation when the gold standard was low, and vice versa (mostly blue for the low-high and high lines in Fig. 3c).
        Last, we note that the AIPS models used fewer genes to infer pathway activation status than the original ROI95 method to generate the gold standard (median 50 versus 200 genes for AIPS versus ROI95 respectively; Wilcoxon’s test P < 0.0001, Fig. 3d).
        Overall, these analyses confirmed that AIPS could accurately recapitulate the assignments of the gold standard. The 1733 AIPS models are listed in Additional file 3: Table S1 and pathway activation assignments can be computed for new individual samples using our AIPS R package [19].
      
      
        Absolute assignment of EGFR pathway activation using AIPS
        Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is well-studied in breast cancer with high activation of this pathway associated with poor patient outcome [20, 21]. We examined the behavior of our AIPS-EGFR model in the McGill validation dataset (Fig. 3e–g). We observed that the activation of samples at the far left and right (low and high respectively) are nearly perfectly inferred by AIPS (kappa = 0.54, P < 0.0001) with the majority of disagreements related to samples in the independent region (Fig. 3e–g). Figure 3f depicts the simple binary rules used by the AIPS model for the EGFR signature across the patient samples. There is a large cluster of EGFR-high patients associated with the PAM50 basal-like (BasalL) subtype, and a second large cluster of EGFR-low patients associated with luminal A and luminal B subtypes, a finding consistent with previous studies [20, 21].
        Interestingly, gene set enrichment analysis of the genes selected to participate in the binary rules revealed an enrichment for genes upregulated by EGFR in MCF7 cells (FDR q value = 1.45e-17) [22]. Furthermore, all of these genes are on the right side (or left side) of binary rules associated (or not-associated) with high EGFR activation (rules marked by an asterisk in the heatmap of Fig. 3f). Although AIPS selects gene pair rules for each model from the large space of all possible gene pairs, it still surprisingly often selects genes that were present in the original signature, and therefore are likely good markers of the underlying biological processes. The enrichment of genes from the original signature was also reported for other “absolute” models such as AIMS [9]. Almost all of our AIPS models had such enrichment (1335 out of 1733 models (77%), Additional file 2: Figure S5). It is important to note that although most models statistically significantly overlapped the original signature, the number of genes from the original signature was still below 10%, suggesting that AIPS models do require many other genes to mimic the ROI95 assignments.
        We asked if the absolute nature of the AIPS method would result in a more consistent EGFR model across gene expression platforms. In particular, we asked if our AIPS model inferred the same activation status for the EGFR pathway in both the microarray and RNA-seq platform for the same patient. Using TCGA data for 398 patients [23], AIPS assignments agreed on 87% of patients between both platforms (Fig. 3h, kappa = 0.81, P < 0.0001). Systematic analysis over the entire partitions (n = 1733 models) revealed that this agreement value is representative of almost all the partitions induced by AIPS and is significantly different from a random distribution (Fig. 3i, Wilcoxon’s test P < 0.0001, all kappa statistics P < 0.0001) supporting the argument that absolute assignments are robust across multiple platforms [9]. Together these results suggest that AIPS is capable of inferring signature activation levels with comparable performance to relativistic tools but with the added benefits of an absolute single sample approach.
      
      
        AIPS assignments agree with whole-cohort inferred pathway scores
        Our goal was to compare AIPS assignments with a second approach from the literature that takes full advantage of an entire dataset to assign signature activation scores. In particular, we used 21 non-redundant scores from the publication of Gatza et al. generated from breast cancer RNA-seq expression data from the TCGA project (n = 456) [24]. Concomitantly, we estimated activation status using our AIPS models for these signatures on the same patients. Overall good agreement between AIPS and the pathway scores from Gatza et al. was observed (Fig. 4a) although the two approaches are quite dissimilar.Fig. 4Assignment by absolute inference of patient signatures (AIPS) agrees with whole-cohort pathway scoring tools. a Comparison between the pathway scores retrieved from Gatza et al. and AIPS. The ordering of the rows and columns is preserved between the two heatmaps. BasalL, basal-like, HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, LumA luminal A, LumB luminal B, ER estrogen receptor, TGFB transforming growth factor beta, EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor, VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor, IFN interferon

        Figure 4a suggests that well-known breast cancer biological processes are recapitulated by AIPS assignments. For example, patients with the luminal A or B subtype (LumA or LumB) are mostly assigned to the AIPS-high class for the ER gene signature, consistent with the fact that subtypes are enriched form ER-positive patients [9, 25]. Also, the AIPS assignments are in good agreement with the proliferation, ESC human and MYC DUKE pathway scores as these processes are known to be associated with the highly proliferative basal-like (BasalL), Her2 and LumB subtypes [25, 26]. We also observed a significant proportion of Her2-positive patients assigned to the AIPS-high Her2 gene signature. The interferon alpha and gamma, STAT1 and TNF alpha pathway scores are in good agreement with the AIPS assignments; these processes are associated with the BasalL subtype [27]. The P53 WT signature from AIPS is in good agreement with the pathway scores and is enriched for the LumA subtype that has been shown to be depleted of P53 mutations [23].
        Generally, if AIPS modules and the pathway scores of Gatza et al. are in good agreement, then the patients within the high class of AIPS should also have the highest pathway scores according to Gatza et al. We tested the agreement between these two approaches and observed a strong relationship (Wilcoxon’s P < 1.4e-14 for all, Additional file 2: Figure S4A). Overall this analysis suggests that the “single-sample” AIPS approach is in good agreement with an approach that uses an entire cohort of samples to judge activation.
      
      
        Sample partitions induced by AIPS are prognostic and associated with breast cancer subtypes
        As there are many pathways and process that are known to vary in their expression across breast cancer subtypes, we investigated the relationship between patient subtype (called using the AIMS tool [9] or using clinical information) and the entire patient partitions generated by AIPS on the McGill dataset (Table 1).
        We first studied the relationship between the partitions induced by AIPS and survival for the different molecular and clinical subtypes (Fig. 5a, b). We noticed that almost half (42.4%) of the partitions are significantly associated with survival if the analysis is performed on the entire cohort (Fig. 5a, b; Additional file 3: Table S1). This number drops drastically if we restrict the survival analysis to patients of given subtype. For example, only around 5% of the partitions are significantly associated with survival for the BasalL, Her2 and Luminal A and to close to nothing for the LumB and normal-like (NormalL) subtypes. Similarly, for the clinical subtypes, we found between 30 and 50% of partitions associated with the ER-positve, Her2-negative and ER-positive/Her2-negative subtypes. Those numbers drops between 3 and 6% for the ER-negative, Her2-positive and ER-negative/Her2-negative subtypes. We found almost no partitions associated with the ER-positive/Her2-positive and ER-negative/Her2-positive clinical subtypes (Fig. 5a, b; Additional file 3: Table S1).Fig. 5Absolute inference of patient signatures (AIPS) models are prognostic. a
Right heatmap depicts the global partitions made by AIPS on the McGill validation dataset (n = 429, cyan low, gray independent, orange high). Left significant associations (false discovery rate (FDR) <5%) induced from AIPS partitions. Far left associations with survival (log-rank test) using the molecular and clinical subtypes and far right significant overlap with the clinical and proliferation molecular subtypes (Fisher’s exact test). b Presentation of the numbers and percentages of AIPS partitions that are significantly (FDR <5%) associated with either survival or overlap. c
Top each bar represents the number of times a patient in the McGill validation dataset was assigned to the low class across all 1733 AIPS partitions. Color indicates the subtype of the patient. Bottom distribution of number of times patients of each subtype were assigned to the low class using AIPS partitions. d Distribution of the number of 100-bp paired-end reads use in the Kallisto quantification (n = 96). e Time taken in minutes for Kallisto quantification and AIPS partitions as a function of the number of paired-end reads. Line represents a linear fit of the data. f Kallisto versus RSEM AIPS partitions agreement versus a background distribution agreement obtained from randomly shuffling the labels 100 times. BasalL, basal-like, HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, LumA luminal A, LumB luminal B, ER estrogen receptor, NormalL normal-like

        We also studied the association between AIPS partitions and the molecular, ER, Her2 and proliferation score [25] using Fisher’s exact test (Fig. 5a, b). We found that between 85 and 92% of the partitions are associated with the different grouping with the exception of the Her2 subtype and the clinical features (Fig. 5a, b). Almost all (92.4%) partitions are associated with proliferation.
        We also examined the frequency of patients classified as low over the entire set of 1733 AIPS models (Fig. 5c). Patients with the LumA and NormalL subtyptes obtained a significantly higher number of assignments compared to the those with the remaining subtypes, with an increase of between 200 and 250 in low assignments (Fig. 5c).
      
      
        AIPS applied on single RNA-seq samples can be performed in a timely fashion
        AIPS should enable a significant amount of information to be extracted from single RNA-seq samples and the growing number of single-cell sequencing datasets. We measured the time necessary to obtain AIPS partitions from a single RNA-seq profile using Kallisto, a fast pseudoalignment program used to obtain transcript quantification from sequencing data [28].
        Using 100-bp paired-end sequencing data (median of 155 million paired-ends per patient [28], n = 96, Fig. 5d) we monitored the time taken to obtain transcript quantification and AIPS partitions using a single central processing unit (CPU). Overall, it required a median 21.6 minutes to obtain AIPS partitions for an individual patient directly from raw paired-end sequencing data (Fig. 5e).
        Given that different transcript quantification pipelines return slightly different results, we evaluated the agreement between AIPS partitions made using Kallisto quantification to partitions made using an alternative approach (Bowtie2 [29] + RSEM [30]). Overall, we found significant agreement between AIPS partitions made from the two quantification approaches (Wilcoxon’s test P < 0.0001 and all kappa statistics P < 0.0001) with a median agreement of approximately 85% (Fig. 5f). Together this establishes that AIPS could be applied in a time-effective manner on single-sample RNA-seq data with the aid of a sufficiently fast pseudoalignment program e.g. Kallisto.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      The work presented here is predicated upon the observation that existing pathway analysis tools are relativistic in nature. In essence, the tools make use of a large panel of samples to “judge” whether there is evidence that the given pathway is underexpressed or overexpressed relative to the panel. We showed here that the scores returned by these tools are sensitive to the composition of patients within the dataset, using a large breast cancer gene expression dataset. More precisely, we showed that the scores returned by these tools vary when the frequency of specific clinicopathological variables is perturbed. Although we have shown this is true for grade, ER and HER2 status, it is likely that many other variables that were assessed (e.g. age, claudin-low status, tumor size) and or not assessed (e.g. tumoral heterogeneity, clonal complexity, lifestyle and information on exposure of the patient) can also affect the estimations of pathway activity using these tools [31–33]. This is non-unintuitive: if the gene expression profile of a patient is included in two different datasets with marked differences in the overall composition of patients (e.g. they differ on the fraction of ER-positive patients), in one dataset a target pathway could be assessed as having high activation but in the second dataset as low. As these, or similar variables, are involved in most, if not all cancers, it is highly likely that this degenerate behavior is not restricted to studies of breast carcinoma. Clearly an “absolute” tool that ablates this “relativistic” behavior would be a step in the right direction.
      The main focus of this study is the development of a de novo framework to estimate the activity of a given pathway using only a single sample. Here we have trained and validated predictive models for 1733 gene signatures for these pathways using a large compendium of breast cancer gene expression profiles. The profiles originate from several distinct microarray and RNA-seq platforms. In order to develop a suitable training and validation dataset, we developed the notion of the q% region of independence (ROIq), which assigns simple discrete levels of activation for a given gene signature and a sufficiently large dataset. Using a large number of synthetic datasets we have shown that the method is robust and can faithfully retrieve low and high activation for many gene signatures within realistic configurations (see Additional file 1). By extending our previous AIMS methodology [9] with this gold standard, we were able to generate 3472 absolute single-sample gene signature activation models of which approximately 50% (1733/3472) performed sufficiently well as to be included in AIPS. We have shown that the AIPS models are more compact, their assignments are reproducible when the same patient is profiled using two distinct platforms, and the models are highly prognostic. Moreover we showed that our ability to estimate the activation of most pathways is not reduced when switching from a relativistic to an absolute method.
      AIPS provides 1733 models that are immediately applicable to new breast cancer samples even when they are profiled in isolation, outside of a large cohort to make comparative assessments. Furthermore, we have shown that AIPS models are prognostic and compare favorably to other whole-cohort approaches, and that AIPS could be applied effectively to RNA-seq data. The term “absolute” expresses the idea that pathway assessment made on such a new “isolated” sample is a function only of the learning phase for each of the 1733 models, and is not done relative to a comparative cohort. This is, to the best of our knowledge, a marked difference from all other pathway tools currently available. The power of this approach is that it allows us to completely define and control the learning set, removing biases and potential confounding variables in downstream analysis. This is not possible with other current approaches where pathway analyses are affected by the other patient profiles in the cohort. Of course, here “absolute” does not imply that pathway assessments are perfect nor can the method judge in all cases the state of a pathway in a tumor relative to a healthy normal control. However, the presence of normal-like samples in our training sets allows us to assess such an “absolute state” of the pathway (the AIPS R package includes this analysis). Of course, the quality and definition of the AIPS models is still a function of the training set. In other words, modifications to the training set might impact model definitions, but here we trained our models over multiple large cohorts in order to minimize the risk that small specialized datasets would skew model parameters. Further refinement and curation of the learning dataset might potentially lead to absolute models.
      Although there is a steadily increasing number of breast cancer gene signatures derived from microarray and RNA-seq based studies, at best a dozen of these signatures are currently directly available to clinicians and patients [34, 35] and almost all of them are suspected to be essentially sophisticated multigene predictors of proliferation [12, 26, 36, 37]. Given an expression profile of a patient sample, AIPS is able to estimate the activation of 1733 of the pathways, molecular processes and functions simultaneously in a timely fashion. This represents a step towards a clinically feasible tool that would provide healthcare providers and clinicians with important information on many aspects of the tumor beyond proliferation.
    
    
      Conclusions
      Kim et al. [38] recently reiterated our observation of the relativistic nature of all current clinical gene expression-based prognostic tests and acknowledge the problematic nature of this situation. The authors suggest that an absolute method could be used with RNA sequencing data to robustly identify patients with a luminal A subtype that may not need chemotherapy in a manner analogous to Oncotype Dx [39]. AIPS represents such a solution and our analyses here suggest that 70% of models (1203/1733) are able to distinguish patients with luminal A cancer from patients with luminal B cancer (FDR <0.01 (Fisher’s exact test), Additional file 3: Table S1). This will provide a broad range of molecular pathways and processes to develop an absolute clinical test to measure patient benefit from chemotherapy.
    
    
      Additional files
      
        
Additional file 1:Supplemental methods. (PDF 589 kb)
Additional file 2: Figure S1.Instability of current pathway activation tools in function of grade and Her2. Figure S2. The ROIq method is able to identify samples with either low or high activation. Figure S3. The ROIq method is able to identify samples with either low or high activation. Figure S4. Comparing pathway scores from Gatza et al. to AIPS assignments. Figure S5. Comparing genes selected in AIPS models with genes in the original gene signature. (PDF 782 kb)
Additional file 3: Table S1.Information on the 1733 selected AIPS models. (XLS 3145 kb)

      
    
  
        
          Background
          Although tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are essential for cancer progression, connections between different clinical outcomes and transcriptional networks have not been reported. We have addressed this issue by analyzing global expression patterns of TAMs isolated from the ascites of ovarian cancer patients.
        
        
          Results
          TAMs isolated from different ovarian cancer patients can be stratified by coexpression or principal component analysis into subgroups with specific biological features and associated with distinct clinical outcomes. A hallmark of subgroup A is a high expression of clinically unfavorable markers, including (i) high CD163 expression, a surface receptor characteristic of an anti-inflammatory activation state, (ii) increased PCOLCE2 expression, indicative of enhanced extracellular matrix organization, and (iii) elevated ascites levels of IL-6 and IL-10, linked to the aggressiveness of ovarian cancer and immune suppression. In contrast, subgroup B TAMs are characterized by the upregulation of genes linked to immune defense mechanisms and interferon (IFN) signaling. Intriguingly, analysis of published data for 1763 ovarian cancer patients revealed a strong association of this transcriptional signature with a longer overall survival. Consistent with these results, IFNγ was able to abrogate the suppressive effect of ovarian cancer ascites on the inducibility of IL12B expression and IL-12 secretion, a key determinant of a cytotoxic immune response.
        
        
          Conclusions
          The survival of ovarian cancer patients is linked to the presence of TAMs with a transcriptional signature that is characterized by a low expression of protumorigenic and immunosuppressive markers and an upregulation of genes linked to interferon signaling. The observed IFNγ-mediated restoration of the inducibility of IL-12 in the presence of ascites provides a possible explanation for the association of an interferon signaling-associated signature with a favorable clinical outcome.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12864-017-3630-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      Ovarian tumors ranks fifth as the cause of cancer-related death in women and represents the deadliest of all gynecological tumors [1, 2]. More than 90% of ovarian cancers are carcinomas that originate from the ovarian surface or fallopian tube epithelium. High grade serous adenocarcinoma is the most common ovarian carcinoma subtype, with most patients presenting with advanced stage disease and disseminated tumor masses at the time of diagnosis. Although most ovarian cancers are highly sensitive to first-line adjuvant chemotherapy, the disease has a dire prognosis with an overall 5-year survival rate of less than 40% [1, 2]. Several characteristic features contribute to the fatal nature of high grade serous ovarian adenocarcinoma, including the shedding of tumor cells at a very early stage of the disease, their spreading via the peritoneal fluid to form transcoelomic metastases and the tumor-promoting and immune suppressive effect of the peritoneal tumor environment, frequently formed by the malignancy-associated effusion within the peritoneal cavity, commonly referred to as malignant ascites. This tumor microenvironment, consisting to a large extent of host-derived cells, is crucial for the growth, progression, therapy resistance and immune escape of malignant tumors, including ovarian cancer [3].
      The most common cell types in ovarian HGSC-associated ascites are macrophages and T lymphocytes [3]. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) can be derived from both blood monocytes [4–6] or resident tissue macrophages [7–13], with the latter most likely representing the major origin of TAMs in ovarian cancer [14]. TAM activation is skewed by factors of the tumor microenvironment to adopt a spectrum of phenotypes that represent mixed forms of alternatively activated (immune regulatory) and pro-inflammatory macrophages [15], which has also been clearly demonstrated for TAMs in ovarian cancer ascites [16]. TAMs do not possess tumoricidal activity, but are rather thought to promote immune suppression and various aspects of cancer growth and progression, including tumor cell invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis [15]. Consistent with these tumor-promoting functions of TAMs, expression of the alternative activation marker CD163 in TAMs from malignancy-associated ascites showed a strong correlation with early relapse of serous ovarian carcinoma after first-line therapy [16]. Among the soluble factors contributing to TAM polarization, tumor progression and a poor clinical outcome, interleukin 10 (IL-10), IL-6, transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) and arachidonic acid play a prominent role [14, 16–20].
      To date, transcriptional signatures of human TAMs that distinguish subgroups of patients have not been described. In the present study, we address this issue by determining the transcriptome of TAMs from different patients in conjunction with principal component analysis (PCA) and coexpression analysis to define distinct subgroups. These analyses lead to the identification of two subgroups differing in the expression of genes associated with cytokine signaling, immune regulation, extracellular matrix reorganization and overall survival. Of note, an interferon (IFN) related signature showed a striking association with a favorable clinical outcome. Furthermore, IFNγ counteracted repression by ovarian cancer ascites of IL-12, a key mediator of an anti-tumor response mediated by natural killer cells (NK) and T lymphocytes, consistent with the observed association of an IFN signaling-associated signature with ovarian cancer survival.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Patient samples
        Ascites was collected from patients undergoing primary surgery at the University Hospital in Marburg. Patient characteristics are presented in Additional file 1: Table S1.
      
      
        Isolation and immunophenotyping of cells from ovarian cancer ascites
        Mononuclear cells were isolated from ascites by Lymphocyte Separation Medium 1077 (PromoCell) density gradient centrifugation and further purified by magnetic cell sorting (MACS) using CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech) [16]. TAMs were analyzed by flow cytometry for surface expression of CD14, CD16, CD32, CD64, CD163 and CD206 as described [16]. Tumor cell spheroids and T cells were analyzed as previously published [21].
      
      
        Isolation and culture of monocyte-derived macrophages
        Monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) were generated from monocytes (6-day differentiation period) from healthy donors as described [22] and cultured in RPMI medium with 5% human male AB serum (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) or cell-free ascites from ovarian cancer patients, as indicated. T cell from peripheral blood were isolated as described for ascites [21]. Buffy coats were obtained from the blood bank at UKGM Giessen, Germany.
      
      
        RT-qPCR
        Isolation of RNA and RT-qPCR were carried out as described [23]. The following primers were used:RPL27_fw: 5′AAAGCTGTCATCGTGAAGAACRPL27_rv: 5′GCTGTCACTTTGCGGGGGTAGIL12B_fw: 5′GCGAGGTTCTAAGCCATTCGIL12B_rev: 5′ACTCCTTGTTGTCCCCTCTGCXCL10_fw: 5′AAGCAGTTAGCAAGGAAAGGTCCXCL10_rv: 5′GACATATACTCCATGTAGGGAAGTGAGBP4_fw: 5′TTCAAAGGCATTAGAGATTCTTGAGBP4_rv: 5′GTGGAGCCCAGAGGGAAGGPNMB_fw: 5′CTATGAGAAGAACTGCAGAAATGGPNMB_rv: 5′GTTATGATGGCTTTGGCCGGLGALS2_fw: 5′CCACGAGTTGAGCCCTGAGLGALS2_rv: 5′CGGCTTCATGTCCATGTTCKITLG_fw: 5′GCCAAGTCTTACAAGGGCAGKITLG_rv: 5′GAAACTCTCTCTCTTTCTCTTGCMRC1_fw: 5′CCT CGG ACC TGG TTA GGGMRC1_rv: 5′GGATGTGTGGTCCTCCTTGG

      
      
        ELISA
        Concentrations of p40 (IL-12B/IL-23) in cell culture supernatants were determined using an ELISA Kit from BioLegend/Biozol (Eching, Germany) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. IFNγ, IL-6 and IL-10 levels in ascites were quantified by ELISA kits purchased from eBioscience (Frankfurt, Germany).
      
      
        RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq)
        RNA isolation and RNA-Seq was carried out on an Illumina HiSeq 1500 as described [21]. Genome assembly and gene model data were retrieved from Ensembl revision 81. Sequencing data were deposited at EBI ArrayExpress (accession numbers E-MTAB-5199 and E-MTAB-4162).
      
      
        Statistical analysis of experimental data
        Paired and unpaired t tests were carried out with the Python functions scipy.stats.ttest_rel () and scipy.stats.ttest_ind (), respectively. Results were expressed as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Confidence intervals were calculated using the bootstrap method. Further statistical analyses were performed using the Python functions numpy.percentile () and pandas.DataFrame.boxplot ().

      
      
        Analysis of RNA-Seq data
        RNA-Seq data was aligned to Ensembl v81 using STAR (version 2.3.1z13_r470) and processed as reported [21]. The number of mapped reads was in the range of 19.74–35.92 million (median 29.42 million). TPM (transcripts per million) values were calculated based on the total gene read counts and length of merged exons and corrected for contamination by tumor cells as described [21]. The source code for implementing the algorithm for TPM correction has also been deposited at GitHub (https://github.com/IMTMarburg/rnaseqmixture). Genes were considered expressed if they had a minimum TPM value of 3. TAM samples with TPM >50 for EPCAM or MSLN were excluded due to presumed tumor cell contamination. All genomic sequence and gene annotation data were retrieved from Ensembl release 81, genome assembly hg38.
      
      
        PCA and delineation of differentially expressed gene clusters
        PCA was carried out on using the sklearnPCA(n_components = 2, whiten = True) and sklearn_pca.fit_transform () functions (Python) on RNA-Seq data. Pearson correlation coefficients (r) were determined with scipy.stats.pearsonr (). The Bioconductor package edgeR [24] was used for the delineation of high variance gene clusters differentially regulated in subgroups of TAMs identified by PCA (signatures 1 and 2).
      
      
        Coexpression analysis
        Genes with the greatest expression variance were identified by pandas.DataFrame.var (). Pearson correlation coefficients (r) were determined for the 3000 top genes using scipy.stats.pearsonr (). Sets of genes with r > 0.89 and n > 10 were combined (n = 629) and analyzed by hierarchical clustering using the scipy.cluster.hierarchy functions linkage (method = “weighted”, metric = “correlation”) and dendrogram (truncate_mode = “none”, color_threshold = 0.8). The resulting 4 clusters (I, II, III, IV) were analyzed for intersections the signatures identified by PCA (see above), which revealed close relationships of cluster I with signature B and cluster III with signature A.
      
      
        Pathway analyses
        Gene sets were analyzed for Upstream Regulators using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) database (Qiagen Redwood City, CA, USA) as described [22]. Functional annotations were performed by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (http://geneontology.org).
      
      
        Survival analyses
        Overall survival (OS) data were retrieved from PRECOG (https://precog.stanford.edu) [25]. Associations between gene expression and relapse-free survival (RFS) were analyzed by the web-based tool “KM Plotter” [26] (http://kmplot.com) using the following settings: ‘auto select best cutoff’, probe set option: ‘JetSet best probe’, histology: serous, datasets: all; other settings: default.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Clustering of ovarian carcinoma TAM samples
        The transcriptomes determined for 18 independent samples of TAM isolated from the ascites of ovarian cancer patients (Additional file 2: Dataset S1) were analyzed for potential similarity patterns by different approaches, as schematically summarized in Fig. 1. These samples were selected for very low contamination with tumor cells, as indicated by low TPM values (<50) for the epithelial marker genes EPCAM and MSLN. Furthermore, we excluded all genes (n = 13) highly expressed in tumor cells or T cells versus TAMs (>100-fold) to minimize interference by contaminating cells.Fig. 1Schematic representation of data analysis and summary of results. Nomenclature for designation of clusters: TAM samples clustered by PCA: letters (A, B); genes clustered by coexpression analysis: roman numbers (I, II, III). Genes identified by edgeR and upregulated in TAM subgroup A or B were defined as signature A and B, respectively

        Genewise normalized TAM transcriptomes were used for the bioinformatic delineation of similarity patterns. Principal component analysis (PCA) did not yield a clear partitioning of TAM samples into subgroups, although eigenvalues suggested that the first two components can explain most of the data. We therefore additionally grouped samples according to the expression of CD163, previously established as a TAM marker associated with a poor clinical outcome of ovarian cancer [16]. Combining PCA with the the expression pattern of this surrogate marker revealed two discernible subgroups (A and B; Fig. 2a), which was confirmed by Pearson correlation (Fig. 2b) and distance-based multidimensional scaling analysis (Additional file 3: Figure S1). Two other markers associated with pro-tumorigenic functions, i.e., IL6 (interleukin 6) [14, 16–21, 27] and PCOLCE2 (procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 2; see Additional file 3: Figure S2), showed a very similar pattern of expression, except for IL6 expression in TAM117 (Fig. 2c-e). Based on this data we defined subgroup A as TAM90, TAM91, TAM101, TAM103, TAM104 and TAM105 expressing CD163, PCOLCE2 and IL6 at high levels relative to the subgroup B samples TAM80, TAM82, TAM112, TAM114, TAM116 and TAM118. These subgroups were confirmed by flow cytometry showing a significantly higher fraction of CD163+ and CD163+CD206+ cells in subgroup A versus subgroup B TAMs, which was not observed for other macrophage markers (Fig. 2f).Fig. 2Clustering of ovarian carcinoma TAM samples based on RNA-Seq data. a Principal component analysis (PCA) of TAM transcriptomes. Samples with high expression of CD163 (TPM > median) are shown in red (sub A), samples with low expression of CD163 in blue (sub B). b Heatmap based on Pearson correlation coefficients (r) calculated for the TAM transcriptomes identified by PCA (sorted by subgroups). c-e Expression of IL6, PCOLCE2 and CD163 in TAM samples of clusters A (red) and B (blue). Dotted lines show the quantiles used in panel (a). f Flow cytometry analysis of cluster A and B samples. The plot shows the fraction of CD16+, CD32+, CD64+, CD163+, CD206+ and CD163+CD206+ cells (of CD14+ cells). g Concentrations of IL-6 and IL10 in the ascites of cluster A and B patients determined by ELISA. Boxes show the upper and lower quartiles, whiskers the 95% confidence intervals (CI), and horizontal lines the median. Asterisks indicate the statistical significance determined by unpaired t test (cluster A versus B samples). n/a, not applicable since all values >97%; ns: not significant

        Taken together, these data indicate that cluster A TAMs are skewed towards alternative activation (CD163), extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling (PCOLCE2) and promotion of tumor growth (IL-6). As these markers are associated with a short relapse-free survival, it is likely that cluster B is linked to a favorable clinical outcome. This conclusion is supported by the observation that the ascites concentrations of IL-10, highly predictive of a poor survival of ovarian cancer [21, 28] was consistently and dramatically increased in subgroup A versus subgroup B patients (Fig. 2g). A similar pattern was observed with IL-6 (with one outlier; Fig. 2g), also associated with a short time to relapse [17, 18, 21].
      
      
        Cluster-specific gene expression
        To gain more insight into the specific phenotypes of subgroup A and B TAMs, we analyzed the RNA-Seq data sets with edgeR, a Bioconductor package for reliable gene-specific dispersion estimation in small datasets [24]. The edgeR tool identified a group of 932 genes differentially expressed in the two subgroups of TAMs with an FDR of <0.05 (Additional file 1: Table S1; Fig. 3a; Additional file 2: Dataset S2). Of these, 329 genes were upregulated in subgroup A versus B, and 603 genes showed the opposite pattern (Fig. 3a; Additional file 2: Datasets S3 and S4). These gene sets were termed signature A and signature B. In contrast to these protein coding RNAs, edgeR did not identify any differentially expressed lncRNAs (FDR <0.05) in our RNA-Seq data set (annotated lncRNAs: n = 7527).Fig. 3Identification of differentially expressed genes in subgroup A versus B TAMs by edgeR. a
Scatter plot showing the expression of genes identified by the edgeR tool (FDR <0.05) in TAM subgroups A or B identified by PCA in Fig. 2. Data represent the ratio (FC) of median TPM values for subgroup A versus subgroup B. b Functional annotation of genes upregulated in subgroup A (red) or subgroup B (blue) by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. p values are plotted against fold enrichment. Only specific non-redundant terms with p values <0.01 and enrichment >3 are shown. c Upstream Regulator Analysis (Ingenuity Pathways Analysis database) of upregulated genes with p < 10−8. d Expression of the IFN signaling-associated genes of signature B identified by GO enrichment analysis (c). Boxes show the upper and lower quartiles, whiskers the 95% CI, and horizontal lines the median. e Validation of RNA-Seq data. Analysis by RT-qPCR of signature A and B genes (Additional file 2: Datasets S3 and S4) in TAM samples from subgroup A and B (n = 6). Error bars show the standard deviation and horizontal lines the mean. Red: cluster A samples; blue: cluster B samples. Asterisks indicate the statistical significance determined by unpaired t test (cluster A versus B samples); ns: not significant

        Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis identified significant associations of signature A with diverse biological processes, including ECM remodeling, locomotion, endocytosis as well as lipid and carbohydrate catabolism (Fig. 3b). In contrast, innate immune defense mechanisms, T cell activation and IFN signaling were strongly associated with signature B (Fig. 3b). Consistent with these findings, Ingenuity Upstream Regulator Analysis indicated that signature B genes are major targets of proinflammatory pathways triggered by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), tumor necrosis factor α (TNF) and INFγ (Fig. 3c), with all three target gene sets showing strong overlaps (Additional file 3: Figure S3).
        The differential expression patterns of signature A and B genes are shown in Fig. 3d and Additional file 3: Figure S4 for the IFN and ECM gene sets identified by GO enrichment analysis as representative examples. As expected, these gene sets showed opposite patterns of regulation and the subgroup-selective expression was clearly significant for the vast majority of genes (n = 48 out of n = 51). The RNA-Seq data for several genes identified by edgeR were confirmed by RT-qPCR (Fig. 3e).
        Taken together, these observations point to a relatively high complexity of biological functions affected by signature A genes, while the role of signature B genes appears to be specifically associated with IFN-stimulated immune defense mechanisms.
      
      
        Confirmation of clustering by coexpression analysis
        To obtain independent evidence for the robustness of the clusters defined by PCA and edgeR we performed coexpression analysis the genes showing the highest variance across all TAM samples. Pearson correlation and hierarchical clustering yielded three large clusters of coregulated genes (Fig. 4a; Additional file 3: Figure S5; Additional file 2: Datasets S5-S7). Hierarchical clustering of TAM samples using a combined set of these genes (Fig.  4a) yielded the identical partitioning into subgroups A and B as the PCA-based approach in Fig. 2a. Consistent with this observation, two of these gene clusters showed substantial and specific overlaps with signatures A and B, respectively, i.e., cluster I with signature A (120/140 = 85,7% and no overlap with signature B); cluster III with signature B (148/266 = 55.6% and no overlap with signature A), as shown in Fig. 4c as well as Additional file 2: Datasets S8 and S9.Fig. 4Coexpression analysis of all TAM samples. a Correlation based heatmap of gene clusters (I, II and III; 265, 222 and 139 genes, respectively) defined by coexpression analysis of genes with the highest variance across all TAM samples, followed by hierarchical clustering (see Additional file 3: Figure S4 for a dendrogram). b Hierarchical clustering of patients based on the genes identified in panel (a). c Overlap of genes in clusters I - IV with signatures A and B identified by PCA. d Functional annotation of cluster I (blue), cluster II (green) and cluster III (red) genes by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. p values are plotted against fold enrichment. Only specific non-redundant terms with p values <0.0001 and enrichment >3 are shown. e Expression of cluster I genes (n = 120; genewise normalized TPM values) in subgroup A (red) and B (blue) samples. f As panel (e), but for cluster II genes (n = 223). g As panel (e), but for cluster III genes (n = 148). Boxes show the upper and lower quartiles, whiskers the 95% confidence intervals (CI), and horizontal lines the median

        Functional annotations revealed endocytosis and chemotaxis for cluster I, chromatin modification and splicing for cluster II, and immune defense and interferon signaling for cluster III (Fig. 4d). Consistent with the overlaps of described in the preceding paragraph, the GO terms for cluster I were also found for signature B, and the terms for cluster III correspond to those for signature A (compare Figs. 3b and 4d).
        Finally, expression of cluster I genes was higher in subgroup B versus subgroup A (Fig. 4e), and vice versa, expression of cluster III genes was higher in subgroup A relative to subgroup B (with the exception of TAM101 (Fig. 4g). In contrast, no differential expression was observed for cluster II genes (Fig. 4f). Taken together, these findings clearly suggest that cluster III corresponds to signature A, while cluster I corresponds to signature B. Thus, both strategies, PCA of patient samples followed by edgeR and coexpression analysis of high variance genes yielded very similar results, and identified IFN signaling as a hallmark of signature B upregulated in subtype B TAMs.
      
      
        Association of signature B, interferon signaling and survival
        In order to identify potential associations between the expression of this genes in ovarian cancer with clinical outcome we made use of the PRECOG database, which contains the results of a meta-analysis of 1763 patients from 12 studies [25]. These studies used solid ovarian tumor tissue containing substantial amounts of myeloid cells [25, 29] for transcriptome analysis, suggesting that the PRECOG data are also suitable for testing survival associations for genes expressed in abundant tumor-associated host cells, such as TAMs.
        Signature A, cluster III and their overlap comprised similar fractions of genes associated with poor or favorable OS (Fig. 5a and top panel in Additional file 3: Figure S6). Only when genes with distinct functional annotations were analyzed separately a clear OS association was detectable. Thus, signature A genes linked to ECM remodeling were strongly associated with a short OS (Fig. 5a and Additional file 3: Figure S7). In contrast, signature B, cluster I and their overlap were clearly linked to a favorable clinical outcome (Fig. 5a and bottom panel in Additional file 3: Figure S6). This applied in particular to the IFN signaling-associated genes of signature B, as shown in detail in Fig. 5b. A similar inverse association with relapse-free survival was also found based on data from the KM plotter database, as exemplified for IRF1 and TAP1 in Fig. 5c and d. All PRECOG z-scores for signature A and B genes are also listed in Additional file 2: Dataset S10.Fig. 5Association of cluster-specific gene expression with ovarian cancer survival. a Mean z-scores (OS) for signature A and B genes; the ECM-related and IFN signaling-associated genes of signature A and B, respectively; cluster III and I genes; and genes representing the intersection of signature A with cluster III or of signature B with cluster I. Survival data were obtained from the PRECOG database with 1763 ovarian cancer patients [25]. b OS z-scores for signature B genes that are associated with IFN signaling. Significant associations with a favorable clinical outcome are shown in blue (z-score < −2.0; HR <1). The corresponding data for the complete signatures A and B are shown in Additional file 3: Figure S6. c-f Kaplan-Meier plots analyzing the association of IRF1, TAP1, CD14 and CD68 with RFS of high-grade serous ovarian cancer determined by KM plotter [26]. g Expression of the signature B genes HLA-DPB1, HLA-DRA and KYNU in TAMs (blue, n = 33), tumor cells (red, n = 15) and CD3+ TATs (green, n = 5) isolated from ovarian cancer ascites

        These associations with a favorable clinical course are not simply consequence of the extent of myeloid cell infiltration. First, activation state-independent myeloid marker genes, such as CD14 or CD68 did not show any significant association with ovarian cancer OS (PRECOG) [25] or RFS [26] (Fig. 5e and f). Second, tumor infiltration by myeloid cells inferred from RNA expression data (CIBERSORT) [29] showed no significant association with OS, with a trend towards a worse clinical outcome for monocytes (Additional file 3: Figure S8). Third, a number of the IFN signaling-associated genes of signature B are expressed at high levels (TPM > 10) selectively in TAMs compared to tumor cells or tumor-associated CD3+ lymphocytes (TATs) isolated from ovarian cancer ascites, as exemplified by HLA-DRA, HLA-DPB1 and KYNU in Fig. 5g).
      
      
        Expression of IFN-encoding genes is linked to ovarian cancer survival
        Analysis of the PRECOG database also revealed a significant association of IFNG expression with a longer survival (z < −2; Fig. 6a). Similar associations were also found for several genes coding for type I IFNs, i.e., IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNA14 and IFNB1. Evaluation of RNA-Seq data for different cell types [21] (Additional file 2: Dataset S1) showed that tumor-associated T cells (TATs) express IFNG at relatively high levels (TPM = 10–100), while TAMs and tumor cells do not (Fig. 6b). Interestingly, all TAT samples expressed IFNG at higher levels than normal CD3+ T cells isolated from the blood of healthy donors, with >10-fold higher levels observed with three out of the five patients analyzed. It is therefore likely, that partially activated TATs are a major source of IFNγ within the tumor microenvironment and the malignancy-associated ascites. This is consistent with the presence of readily detectable IFNγ levels in the ascites of a subgroup of patients (n = 21 above ELISA detection limit out of a total of n = 61 samples; Fig. 6c). By contrast, all type I IFN genes associated with a favorable OS were expressed a very low levels by all three cell types, if at all (Additional file 3: Figure S9).Fig. 6Associations of IFN gene expression with survival and abrogation by IFNγ of the ascites-induced IL12B activation block. a z-scores for the association of IFN genes with OS (PRECOG data). Blue bars: significant associations with a favorable clinical outcome (z-score < −2.0; HR <1). b Expression of IFNG in TAMs (n = 33), tumor cell (n = 22) and TATs (n = 5) samples from ovarian carcinoma ascites, and in CD3+ T cells from healthy donors (n = 2). Each dot represents an individual sample (see Additional file 2: Dataset S1 for details). c IFNγ concentrations in the ascites from n = 61 ovarian cancer patients determined by ELISA. d
IL12B expression in MDMs differentiated for 6 d either in RPMI plus 5% human A/B serum (R5 medium) or in ovarian cancer ascites in the absence or presence of IFNγ (50 ng/ml). Cultures were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) plus IFNγ (20 ng/ml) or solvent only (Ctrl) for 24 h and RNA was analyzed by RT-qPCR. The experiment was performed with 7 independent samples (combinations of 5 donors and 5 ascites samples). e p40 (IL-12B/IL-23) protein concentrations in the culture medium of the experiments in panel (d). Each dot represents an independent sample. Horizontal lines: median. Significance was determined by t-test between unstimulated and IFNγ + LPS-stimulated cells

      
      
        IFNγ prevents the ascites-induced IL12B activation block in macrophages
        Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a particularly interesting cytokine in the context of ovarian cancer due to its immune stimulatory anti-tumor effects and its inverse associations with disease progression patients [30–32]. A hallmark of TAMs in ovarian cancer ascites is their defect to release IL-12 in response to inflammatory stimuli, which results from a transcriptional block of the IL12B gene encoding the p40 subunit [14, 33, 34]. Another cytokine with beneficial immune stimulatory and anti-tumor effects in ovarian cancer patients is IFNγ [35–38], consistent with the observation that IFNγ can prevent the skewing of monocyte differentiation by ovarian cancer ascites from immunostimulatory IL-10lowIL-12high macrophages to TAM-like IL-10highIL-12low cells [34]. To assess the relevance of the IFN signaling-associated signature B we explored the relationship between IL-12 and IFNγ in further detail.
        Toward this end, we measured the inducibility of IL12B mRNA by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus IFNγ in monocyte-derived macrophages that were differentiated either in the presence of regular cell culture medium (R5) or in ascites, both in the absence or presence of IFNγ during macrophage differentiation. As expected, all ascites samples tested blocked IL12B induction, which, however, was almost completely prevented by IFNγ (Fig. 6d). In full agreement with these findings, secretion of p40 was strongly induced by LPS plus FNγ in R5, which was blocked by ascites only in the absence of IFNγ during differentiation (Fig. 6e). These results clearly point to a clinically beneficial IFNγ – p40/IL12B axis in differentiating myeloid cells in the ovarian cancer microenvironment, thus providing a potential explanation for the association of subgroup B TAMs with clinically favorable parameters.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      
        Delineation of subgroups of TAMs
        Transcriptional signatures of TAMs distinguishing subgroups of patients in a biologically or clinically meaningful way have not been reported to date. We have used the ovarian cancer-associated ascites as an experimental system to address this issue by an unbiased approach (Fig. 1). By applying PCA to data derived by next generation sequencing we were able to split TAM samples from different patients into subgroups characterized by distinct gene expression patterns (Fig. 2). Remarkably, cluster B is basically congruent with the subgroup of patients with low expression of the IL6, PCOLCE2 and CD163 genes, a low fraction of anti-inflammatory CD163+/CD206+ TAMs and low ascites concentrations of IL-10 and IL-6 (Fig. 2c-g). These features are known as negative prognostic factors for different tumor entities, including ovarian cancer [16–18, 21, 28, 39, 40]. The same subgroups were also identified by an another unbiased approach, i.e., coexpression analysis of all TAM samples (Fig. 4). Therefore, these findings clearly suggest that subgroups A and B represent patients with a poor and favorable clinical outcome, respectively.
      
      
        IFN signaling is a hallmark of signature B TAMs
        Intriguingly, a hallmark of subgroup B is the upregulation of target genes of the IFN signaling network (Figs. 3b and 4d). Consistent with this finding, our analysis of the PRECOG database revealed a strong association of these genes with a longer OS (Fig. 5b). This is in agreement with previous studies which associated a high protein expression of several IFN signaling components with a favorable clinical outcome, including IRF1 [41]. Furthermore, IFNγ inclusion in the first-line therapy of ovarian cancer resulted in an effector immune cell response [35] and a prolongation of progression-free survival [36, 37], while type I IFNs had no benefit [42]. In keeping with these observations, elevated IFNG expression in ovarian cancer tumor tissue correlated with an improved clinical outcome in patients [43].
        Our upstream regulator and functional annotations (Figs. 3b, c and 4c) yielded IFNγ and type I IFN as activated signaling pathways. We attribute this apparent ambiguity to the fact that type I and II target genes show substantial overlaps. Type I IFNs signal through their common receptor complex via JAK1/TYK2 to the heterotrimer ISGF3 (STAT1:STAT2:IRF9) and, to a lesser extent, through STAT1 homodimers, whereas IFNγ, the single type II IFN, uses only STAT1 homodimers phosphorylated by IFNγ receptor-associated JAK1/JAK2 [44]. Furthermore, STAT-independent pathways could be activated differentially by the different receptor complexes. Taken together, this explains the overlapping, but not identical, effects of the two types of IFNs. Interestingly, JAK2 is among the signature B genes identified in this study (Fig. 3d, Additional file 2: Dataset S4) and might thus contribute to IFNγ-mediated effects. Taken together with our observation that, in contrast to IFNG (Fig. 6b), none of the type I IFN genes associated with a longer OS is expressed at significant levels by TAMs, TATs or tumor cells (Additional file 3: Figure S9) it is conceivable that upregulation of the IFN target genes of signature B is due to activated IFNγ signaling.
        Collectively, these findings suggest that the increased expression of IFN target genes in cluster B TAMs results, at least in part, from an elevated level of IFNγ in the tumor microenvironment. Of note, a substantial fraction of the IFN signature genes upregulated in cluster B TAMs are also target genes of pro-inflammatory pathways (Additional file 3: Figure S3). This suggests that other cytokines present in ascites, notably TNFα [45], might contribute to the induction of these genes. This would be consistent with the prevailing opinion that pro-inflammatory macrophages inhibit tumor progression.
        Since RNA-Seq measures mean transcript levels within a cell population, the fraction of TAMs expressing a given signature cannot be determined. It is therefore possible that elevated expression of IFN genes reflects the higher relative occurrence of a subpopulation of cells. These might be a newly recruited, CD163-negative, monocyte-like TAM subset similar to the macrophage fraction that is able to elicit inflammatory responses in immune privileged reproductive organs [46]. This hypothesis is in agreement with the flow cytometry data in Fig. 2f, indicating that CD163+ and CD163− cells occur in both subgroup A and B, even though their ratio is clearly different in both subpopulations. Likewise, it is possible that a few TAM samples could not be fitted into either subgroup (Fig. 2a) due to the presence of similar fractions of functionally different subpopulations.
      
      
        Role of T cells
        Ascites contains substantial numbers of different types of T cells, in particular CD4+ and CD8+ cells [47, 48], known as important IFNγ producers under physiological conditions. A functional role of T cells in ovarian cancer is supported by many published observations strongly associating infiltrating T cells with a longer survival, with a high ratio of CD8+ versus regulatory T cells having a strong impact [47–49]. Consistent with these findings, transcriptome analyses defined distinct high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma subtypes, of which the immune reactive subtype was associated with the best prognosis [50]. Transcriptome profiling also identified several genes contributing to cytotoxic T lymphocyte recruitment as being differentially expressed in tumors with high versus low CD8 T cell infiltration, including IRF1 [51–53], providing another link between T cells, IFNγ and a favorable clinical outcome. Furthermore, the analysis in Fig. 6a revealed a positive impact of IFNG expression on ovarian cancer OS. It is thus possible that IFNγ in the tumor microenvironment and the expression of IFN target genes in TAMs are indicators of the presence of activated, IFNγ secreting T and/or NK cells mediating anti-tumor immune responses.
        Our RNA-Seq data support the conclusion that TATs are a major source of IFNγ in ascites (Fig. 6b). Since TATs showed a considerably higher level of IFNG expression compared to normal T cells, it is likely that the former are partially activated, at least in a subset of patients. This would be consistent with the observed clonal expansion of T cell subpopulations of unknown biological relevance in ovarian cancer ascites [54]. However, TATs apparently are not functional with respect to an anti-tumor response, as suggested by progression of the disease, presumably due the inhibitory effect of ascites on T cell activation [55]. In line with this conclusion other makers of an activated TH1, TH2, TH9 or TH17 response were only weakly upregulated in a subset of TATs relative to normal T cells (e.g., FASLG, GZMA, TNF), expressed at similar levels in both (e.g., CCR4, IL10, LAMP1/CD107A, LTA, PRF1) or not expressed at all (e.g., IL2, IL4, IL9, IL12B, IL13, IL17A) (Additional file 2: Dataset S1).
      
      
        Inflammatory signaling and IL-12 induction
        There is a large body of evidence to suggest that IFNγ and IL-12 are key determinants of a beneficial immune response in many cancers [56]. Physiologically, IL-12 is released by macrophages and other antigen-presenting cells in response to proinflammatory signals, including toll-like receptor ligands and IFNγ from T or NK cells. IL-12 in turn stimulates a cytotoxic response by inducing multiple immune stimulatory processes, including the differentiation of naive T cells into Th1 cells, the activation of CD8 + T cells and the maturation or activation of NK cells [57].
        Multiple observations strongly support the hypothesis that IL-12, and probably its induction by IFNγ, are crucial determinants of ovarian cancer outcome. For example, IL-12 locally produced significantly delayed peritoneal disease development in a mouse model [32], engineered tumor-targeted T cells ectopically expressing a fused IL12A/IL12B cDNA have been reported to eradicate ovarian tumors in vivo [31] and a highly significant association was found between high IFNG and IL12B expression and a more favorable clinical outcome of advanced stage ovarian carcinoma [30].
        In TAMs, the acquisition of a proinflammatory phenotype, including the secretion of IL-12, in response to proinflammatory signals is non-functional. In LPS-stimulated murine macrophages, Il12b induction is selectively dependent on the NFκB family member Rel [58] and on TLR signaling-induced chromatin remodeling which is independent of Rel [59]. Furthermore, IFNγ has been shown to enhance the synthesis of IL-12 by priming macrophages for LPS-mediated induction of the IL12B gene [60]. Finally, the nuclear accumulation of a NFκB p50 homodimer with presumed inhibitory function has been suggested for the acquisition of a TAM phenotype characterized by the defective production of IL-12 [33]. Intriguingly, IFNγ can prevent the inhibitory effect of ascites on the inducibility of IL12B in macrophages (Fig. 6d, e), consistent with a previous report that IFNγ was able to shift monocyte differentiation from TAM-like cells to pro-inflammatory macrophages [34]. It is currently unclear if, and if so how, TLR pathways, IFNγ triggered STAT signaling, chromatin remodeling and p50 accumulation functionally interact in the regulation/dysregulation of the IL12B gene in either normal macrophages or TAMs. Understand these connections will be crucial to be able to explore the potential of the IFNγ – IL-12 axis in stimulating cytotoxic immune responses and assess potential applications.
      
    
    
      Conclusions
      In the present study, we have address the question as to whether associated-derived TAMs from different patients with ovarian cancer represent a continuum of overlapping transcriptomes or can be categorized into phenotypically distinct groups on the basis of their global gene expression patterns. The results of both principal component analysis (PCA) and coexpression analysis clearly demonstrated that the latter is the case, and lead to the definition of two highly distinct subgroups of patients differing in the expression of genes associated with cytokine signaling, immune regulation and extracellular matrix reorganization. One of the two subgroups identified (subgroup A) is associated with a high expression of protumorigenic, immunosuppressive and clinically unfavorable markers, including IL-6, IL-10, CD163 and PCOLCE2. By contrast, the second subgroup is characterized by the upregulation of genes linked to IFN signaling and associated with a longer survival. Expression of this IFN-related signature also showed a striking link to a longer survival, and IFNγ abrogated the inhibitory effect of ovarian cancer ascites on the inducibility of IL-12 in cultured macrophages. As IL-12 is a key mediator of a cytotoxic immune response, this finding provides a possible explanation for the link of the IFN signaling-associated signature B to ovarian cancer survival.
    
  
        Memory T cells exhibit transcriptional memory and “remember” their previous pathogenic encounter to increase transcription on re-infection. However, how this transcriptional priming response is regulated is unknown. Here we performed global FAIRE-seq profiling of chromatin accessibility in a human T cell transcriptional memory model. Primary activation induced persistent accessibility changes, and secondary activation induced secondary-specific opening of previously less accessible regions associated with enhanced expression of memory-responsive genes. Increased accessibility occurred largely in distal regulatory regions and was associated with increased histone acetylation and relative H3.3 deposition. The enhanced re-stimulation response was linked to the strength of initial PKC-induced signalling, and PKC-sensitive increases in accessibility upon initial stimulation showed higher accessibility on re-stimulation. While accessibility maintenance was associated with ETS-1, accessibility at re-stimulation-specific regions was linked to NFAT, especially in combination with ETS-1, EGR, GATA, NFκB, and NR4A. Furthermore, NFATC1 was directly regulated by ETS-1 at an enhancer region. In contrast to the factors that increased accessibility, signalling from bHLH and ZEB family members enhanced decreased accessibility upon re-stimulation. Interplay between distal regulatory elements, accessibility, and the combined action of sequence-specific transcription factors allows transcriptional memory-responsive genes to “remember” their initial environmental encounter.
      
    Naïve T cells exist at rest until exposed to activating signals from antigen presenting cells. This activates transcription to co-ordinate proliferation, differentiation, and the production of inflammatory molecules to clear infection. Naïve and memory T cell transcriptomes are similar apart from a distinct subset of genes involved in processes such as cell adhesion and survival12. In contrast to naïve T cells, memory T cells are primed for a rapid response to antigenic re-exposure123. This enhanced response is in part attributed to more efficient T cell receptor (TCR) signalling such as increased activity of ZAP-704, the MAP kinases56, and protein kinase C (PKC)7. PKC family members -θ, η, α, δ are important in T lymphocyte signalling89. T cell activation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) can activate the “novel” PKCs (including PKC-θ) and, when administered with calcium ionophore, the conventional PKCs10. Together, PMA and calcium ionophore mimic T lymphocyte activation and induce genes such as IL2 and TNF1112. PKC-θ signalling activates a number of transcription factors including the NFκB family members as well as AP1 and NFAT81314, which have a major role in regulating chromatin configuration upon T cell activation1516.
    Chromatin modifications are different at regulatory regions of memory-responsive genes poised for rapid expression31718. DNA winding around histones affects accessibility to RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and other regulators to control transcription. Histone modifications19 and the incorporation of histone variants2021 regulate histone-DNA interactions to control chromatin accessibility. Histone modifications such as H3K4me3 and H3K9ac identify “active” transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and gene promoters, while others such as H3K4me1 and H3K27ac identify distal regulatory elements (enhancers)22. Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE) is one technique that can measure chromatin accessibility. Combined with high-throughput sequencing (FAIRE-seq), it has been used to demonstrate that chromatin accessibility changes during cellular differentiation in adipocytes23, myeloid cells24, and breast epithelial cells25 largely occur at promoters and enhancers.
    To understand the process of T cell response priming, we globally profiled chromatin accessibility by FAIRE-seq in a previously described7 human T cell (Jurkat) transcriptional memory (JTM) model of four distinct transcriptional states: 1) non-stimulated cells, 2) stimulated cells, 3) “transcriptionally experienced” or memory-like cells after stimulus withdrawal, and 4) re-stimulated memory-like cells. We found that the initial stimulation alters the chromatin accessibility landscape, especially at regions distant from TSSs. Many of these alterations persisted in the resting memory state, and secondary activation induced secondary-specific opening of previously restricted regions. We identified and characterised regions with enhanced chromatin accessibility that associated with increased expression of memory-responsive genes and identified a role for the combinatory action of transcription factors, unravelling a central role for NFAT and ETS in regulating these regions. Lastly, we perturbed the initial PKC signal and subsequent NFAT and NFκB activation to help dissect the pathways involved in regulating the changes in chromatin accessibility in transcriptional memory. Overall, transcriptional responses are primed via the chromatin accessibility landscape in memory T cells.
    
      Results
      
        Primary stimulation irreversibly alters the chromatin accessibility landscape
        We performed genome-wide FAIRE-seq analysis of open chromatin in the Jurkat transcription memory (JTM) model to determine the chromatin accessibility domains marking transcriptional memory-responsive genes. The JTM model7 consists of four cell states: NS (non-stimulated naïve T cells), ST (PMA and ionomycin (I) stimulated), SW (stimulus withdrawal, memory-like T cells), and RS cells (re-stimulation of the memory-like T cell state) (Fig. 1a). The cells were pre-treated with DMSO as a vehicle control for the experiments with the PKC inhibitor rottlerin. The stimulation of Jurkat cells globally altered chromatin accessibility (Spearman’s rank correlation 0.78 compared to NS; Fig. 1b), and this overall difference partly persisted in SW (ρ = 0.80). However, the greatest chromatin accessibility changes were detected in RS (ρ = 0.70). For comparison, rottlerin pre-treatment of NS cells, which was not expected to induce changes, had ρ = 0.93 compared to the DMSO pre-treated NS cells.
        We next identified regions with increased or decreased chromatin accessibility in ST, SW, and RS cells compared to NS cells (see Methods, Fig. S1A–D) and their overlap (Fig. 1c,d). The 5337 regions with increased chromatin accessibility in ST, SW, and/or RS cells were classified into sets (sets a–g, Fig. 1c,e). Regions in sets b and e showing greater chromatin accessibility in ST and RS cells were further subdivided depending on whether accessibility was greater in ST (b1,e1) or RS (b2,e2). This included patterns with: chromatin accessibility greatest in primary (1°) activation (1° enriched; a, b1,e1); chromatin accessibility greatest in secondary (2°) activation (2° enriched; b2,c,e2); and high chromatin accessibility in SW (f,g). Of the 2516 regions with increased chromatin accessibility in ST (a,b,d,e), 671 retained CA in SW (d,e; Fig. 1c) and 579 regions (e) were common to the ST, SW, and RS samples. A further 1391 regions (f,g) had “delayed” greater chromatin accessibility in SW compared to NS controls, with 492 of these also having chromatin accessibility in RS cells (f, Fig. 1c). In RS, 1013 regions (b) with reversed chromatin accessibility in SW were re-induced, and accessibility increases at 1430 2° specific regions (c) were identified. Regions with decreased chromatin accessibility relative to NS were similarly grouped (h–n) (Fig. 1d). Decreases tended to be less reversible than increases in accessibility. Overall, RS had the greatest number of regions with increased or decreased chromatin accessibility and had more increased regions in common with ST than with SW cells.
        Here, FAIRE-seq identified four patterns with enhanced chromatin accessibility in RS: (i) stimulation-dependent chromatin accessibility that is lost in SW but enhanced upon RS (b2); (ii) 2°-specific chromatin accessibility detected only in the RS state (c); (iii) persistent chromatin accessibility that remains in cells from ST and SW but is highest in RS (e2); and (iv) delayed chromatin accessibility that is detected in SW and RS T cells (f).
      
      
        Altered chromatin accessibility regions occur near immune pathway genes, with increased chromatin accessibility in RS occurring near memory-responsive genes
        We identified the nearest genes to the regions and found that in comparison to regions that exhibited little change in chromatin accessibility, those with differential accessibility were primarily located in intron and intergenic regions (Fig. S1F). Genes near increased chromatin accessibility regions were significantly enriched for TCR and chemokine signalling pathways (Fig. 1f, Fig. S1G). Genes associated with regions that exhibited either increased or decreased accessibility were enriched for immune-related terms including lymphocyte activation, haematopoietic development, regulation of apoptosis, cell morphogenesis, and cell adhesion processes (Fig. 1f). Of note, a subset of immune-responsive genes including CXCR5, PLCG2, DOCK2, CSF1, and BCL3 were associated with increased chromatin accessibility regions in SW cells, and while their transcription did not necessarily change in Jurkat cells, increased transcription was observed in in vivo models of T cell memory and/or differentiation (Fig. 1g). This supports a role for the primary TCR signal in changing the plasticity of the chromatin accessibility landscape so that cues such as cytokines can activate signalling pathways whose target transcription factors can then access these opened regulatory regions and activate transcription.
        We next used JTM microarray data (GSE61172; same as FAIRE-seq except with 9 day SW) to determine the relationship between chromatin accessibility changes and transcription of memory-responsive genes. As regulatory regions can act on genes up to 750 kb away25, we examined the relationship between regions and expression by determining the percentage of memory-responsive genes (expression higher in RS than NS and ST) or “1° response” genes (higher expression in ST than NS and RS) which had TSSs within 50 kb of the region sets (Fig. 1h). Regions exhibiting increased chromatin accessibility in 1° (a,b1,e1) and 2° states (b2,c,e2) demonstrated a greater association with 1° response genes than expected (p < 0.05). There were significantly more memory-responsive genes within 50 kb of all 2° enriched sets, SW enriched sets (f and g), and set b1 than expected (p < 3 × 10−6). Genes exhibiting decreased transcription in RS cells (Fig. S1H) were generally associated with regions that exhibited a decrease in chromatin accessibility.
        Memory-responsive genes with 2°-specific memory chromatin accessibility regions (c) included IL8, ID2, and FASLG. Memory-responsive genes with persistent (e2) or delayed memory (f) chromatin accessibility included MIR21, BIRC3, PRDM8, TNFSF10, DUSP10, MIR155, and LTA (Fig. S2A). The region near LTA can enhance LTA and TNF transcription in reporter plasmids2627, and, in stimulated T cells, contacts the TNF promoter27; we refer to this region as LTA/TNF. Interestingly, many memory-responsive genes near these SW accessible regions had low transcription in SW cells (Fig. S2), suggesting that this chromatin accessibility may prime genes for an enhanced response upon RS rather than contribute to transcription in SW.
        Contacts between distal regulatory regions and their promoter targets have been reported to strengthen upon stimulation27, while others have suggested that contact reflects a preconfigured state for transcriptional poising282930. Chromosome conformation capture (3C) can be used to determine if distal elements are in close contact to the TSSs of particular genes31. Using primers targeting three of our memory accessible regions located 6–35 kb from the TSSs of the memory-responsive genes DUSP10, BCL6, and TNFSF10 (Fig. S3), we compared distal TSS interactions of these memory-responsive genes in NS, ST, and SW (6 days) cells. We also used control primers for a gene desert region32 to measure background interactions occurring by chance. Interactions were significantly greater in NS and ST cells for TNFSF10 (p = 0.025 and 0.011) than the 8.7 kb control, and a similar interaction was also detected for BCL6 (p = 0.021 and 0.002) and DUSP10 (p = 0.001 and 0.043) compared to the 25 kb control (Fig. 1i). There was no amplification of the 34 kb control region in any treatment. Unexpectedly, interactions were not significant in SW cells, although still stronger on average than control regions. When normalised for control region interactions, changes across treatments were not significant and the differences in control region interactions across treatments indicate that they are incomparable. Thus, at least for the regions examined, the memory accessible enhancer regions interacted with promoters of memory-responsive genes, and these interactions were present in NS cells before increased gene expression upon activation.
      
      
        Changes in chromatin accessibility primarily occur in enhancer regions and occur in CD4+ memory lymphocytes in selected human individuals
        As a large proportion of the changes in chromatin accessibility occurred away from a TSS, we examined if they were occurring in genomic regions containing histone marks associated with regulatory elements such as enhancers. We used Roadmap chromatin state annotations22 to profile the histone environment of our regions in different primary cell types including CD4+ naïve and memory cells. We initially grouped the chromatin states into permissive (H3K4me3), enhancer (H3K4me1/H3K27ac), transcription (H3K36me3), repressive (H3K27me3), heterochromatin (H3K9me3), and quiescent (low or no marks). While 33% of regions with unchanged chromatin accessibility were in permissive regions in CD4+ memory cells, less than 21% of any of the sets with increased chromatin accessibility were associated with such permissive regions (Fig. 2a). Instead, larger proportions of sets that exhibited an increase in chromatin accessibility overlapped with enhancer regions (35–50%, Fig. 2a). In contrast to the less cell-specific permissive regions, the majority of enhancer regions with increased chromatin accessibility were more cell specific and only had enhancer chromatin marks in T cells or CD34+ progenitor cells (Fig. S4A).
        Using the H3K27ac, H3K4me3, and H3K4me1 marks in naïve, memory, and PMA/I-stimulated Th cells from the same donor22, we examined the FAIRE peak positions with respect to the modified histones using average ChIP-seq data profiles (Fig. 2b). The modified histones flanked accessible regions, particularly in activated cells. These profile shape changes suggested that chromatin accessibility increases could be associated with flanking nucleosomes becoming more fixed in their positions and the development of a “nucleosome-depleted region” (Fig. 2b). This could at least in part be due to increases in histone marks such as acetylation and/or H3K4 methylation.
        Based on relative H3K27ac and H3K4me1 levels, Roadmap divides enhancer states into weak, active and poised. Most accessible regions annotated as enhancers were in a weak state in naïve cells (Fig. 2c). However, in the delayed (f) and persistent memory (e2) sets, 20–22% of the weak enhancers gained H3K27ac in memory cells to become active enhancers. Furthermore, 21–22% of quiescent regions in these sets gained enhancer marks. In contrast, a greater proportion of the weak enhancers in sets with corresponding decreases in chromatin accessibility (m and l2) lost H3K4me1 (18–21%) (Fig. S4B). With respect to the four different memory chromatin accessibility groups (b2,c,e2,f), 34–46% of regions which were weak enhancers in naïve cells became active enhancers in PMA/I-stimulated Th cells, and 17–26% of the quiescent regions had enhancer marks (Fig. 2c). Regions near memory-responsive genes were mainly located in permissive or enhancer environments (Fig. 2c).
        To determine if primary memory T cells also showed increased chromatin accessibility at regions with delayed or persistent memory in the JTM, we performed FAIRE-PCR on naïve and memory CD4+ cells isolated from six healthy donors (Fig. 2d,e). Nine candidate regions near memory-responsive genes were chosen that had either delayed memory (TNFSF10, MIR155, DUSP10), persistent memory (PRDM8, BCL12A1, LTA/TNF, BIRC3, MIR21), or otherwise maintained chromatin accessibility in SW cells (BCL6). Regions close to DUSP10, BCL6, MIR155, BIRC3, and LTA/TNF had significantly higher chromatin accessibility levels in memory CD4+ cells compared to naïve cells (Fig. 2e). Interestingly, not all donors had increased accessibility for all regions, and different donors did not have increased accessibility detected for different regions, most noticeably donor 4 and MIR21. It would be interesting to determine whether this variability reflects differences in memory subsets and if individual memory lymphocytes show variability within the same donor.
        Together, the Roadmap analysis and primary cell experiments highlight the overlap between changes in primary cells and the JTM and that changes in chromatin accessibility occur in regions with enhancer or weak permissive chromatin marks.
      
      
        Stimulation-induced changes in chromatin accessibility are related to changes in H3 and H2AZ levels and acetylation and persist throughout cell division despite stimulus withdrawal
        In agreement with other studies3334, the chromatin state transitions suggest that histone modifications might mediate a subset of chromatin accessibility changes. Histone variants also influence chromatin accessibility21, and we have previously observed variant exchange at inducible gene promoters upon stimulation35. We used the promoter of BIRC3 (e2) and the enhancer of TNFSF10 (f) as illustrative examples to examine the deposition of H2A. Z and H3.3 variants and the enrichment of tail (H3K27) and globular (H3K56) acetylation (Fig. 3a). H2A. Z but not H3 levels significantly decreased on stimulation (Fig. 3a). In SW, despite significantly lower levels of H2AZ being detected at the TNFSF10 enhancer region compared to NS, a greater proportion of the H2AZ was acetylated (Fig. 3a). Similar to H2AZ, H3 levels were significantly decreased at both of these regions in SW, but K27 and K56 were highly acetylated and this profile was accompanied by increases in H3.3 deposition (Fig. 3a). There was no increase in the H3K4me1 enhancer mark at the TNFSF10 region, although there was evidence of relatively higher H3K4me3 in SW cells for the BIRC3 promoter (Fig. S4C). In RS, H2AZ levels decreased further.
        We have previously shown that SW Jurkat cells maintain the ability to induce enhanced IL2 transcription after several cell divisions7. To establish whether increased chromatin accessibility persists through cell division, FAIRE-PCR was performed on SW and RS cells rested for 6 days after stimulation. Jurkat cells stimulated with PMA/I and then washed underwent cell division at least 6 times over the following 6 days (Fig. S2D). In addition to the 9 aforementioned candidate regions, we also examined: 3 with 2°-specific memory near memory-responsive genes (IL8, FASL, ID2); 3 (CREB5, DUSP2, and BACH2) with similar chromatin accessibility in ST and RS that were near inducible genes with similar transcription, and 1 (TRIB3) that had higher chromatin accessibility and transcription in ST cells. After 6 days of rest, the response to re-stimulation was significantly higher than that for 1° stimulation for regions from the different memory chromatin accessibility groups except for PRDM8 and IL8, which showed non-significant increases (Fig. 3b). The delayed and persistent memory regions near TNFSF10, MIR155, DUSP10, BCL2A1, LTA/TNF, BIRC3, and MIR21 all maintained significant increases in SW day 6 samples (p < 0.05), with BCL6 and PRDM8 showing consistent but non-significant increases (Fig. 3b). In contrast, the 4 control regions and 2 2°-specific regions (IL8 and FASLG) had similar chromatin accessibility levels in the NS and day 6 SW samples (Fig. 3b). Increased chromatin accessibility is, therefore, at least partially maintained throughout at least 6 cell divisions, and the increased chromatin accessibility changes likely reflect decreases in nucleosome occupancy with exchange of H3.3 and relative increases in acetylation of the histones.
      
      
        NFAT binding sites are associated with chromatin accessibility in RS cells, and ETS and GATA sites are associated with maintenance of chromatin accessibility
        To identify the transcription factors responsible for changes in chromatin accessibility, we examined the regions for over-represented transcription factor binding motifs (Fig. 4a,b, Fig. S5B). AP1, EGR, RUNX, ETS, NFκB, NFAT, nuclear receptors, TCF7L2 (HMG), and GATA DNA-binding motif families were significantly enriched in regions with increased chromatin accessibility, but their enrichment altered over the region sets (Fig. 4a,b). AP1, EGR, NFκB, and NFAT were most enriched in sets with increases in ST and/or RS cells, with AP1 enriched more in the 1° sets (a,b1,d, and e1) with higher chromatin accessibility in ST cells and NFAT more in sets b2 and c with higher chromatin accessibility in RS cells (Fig. 4a,b). Examination of expression of the factors that bind these motifs indicated that many were inducible (Fig. S5A). Differential induction of several of the factors that bind the AP1 motif, including ATF3 and FOS, in ST and RS cells may contribute to differences in the chromatin accessibility patterns of the various AP1-containing regions. Interestingly, the ETS motif was more enriched in sets c-g, particularly those that maintain chromatin accessibility in SW cells (Fig. 4). Similarly, the GATA motif was most enriched in sets e2, f, and g.
        By comparison, bHLH family motifs were enriched in decreased chromatin accessibility regions (Fig. S5B,C). Unlike other families, there were differences between different members. While at least 3 of the factors that bound to this motif family - TCF3, TCF12, and TFAP4 - decreased expression with stimulation, the altered chromatin accessibility may also have been due to increased expression of the inhibitory ID family, which also bind the motif (Fig. S5A).
        Many motif combinations increased the relative percentage of regions in a given set. Set c comprised 16% of all regions in sets a-n (Fig. 4c), a percentage that increased in regions containing both NFAT and GATA or EGR and GATA (Fig. S5) and even further in regions containing all 3 motifs (Fig. 4d). The proportion of set c regions also increased in those containing NFAT and ETS but not bHLH (CACC) (Fig. 4e). Strikingly, when we examined every combination of regions that contained one of the motifs of interest but lacked the NFAT motif, there was a marked decrease in the percentage of regions accessible more in RS (b2, c) (Fig. S6). The co-occurrence of NFAT and NFκB not only favoured increased chromatin accessibility in 2° regions (Fig. 4f,g), but also had the highest proportion of regions near a memory-responsive gene, and 11% of regions with NFAT, NFκB, and NR4A were near a memory-responsive gene.
        For AP1-containing regions, co-occurrence with NFAT and/or NFκB increased the proportion of regions in b2 (Fig. 4f), while co-occurrence with ZEB and/or EGR increased set b1 and a proportions (Fig. 4h). Co-occurrence of ZEB appeared to influence bHLH-containing regions, resulting in more set l2 (Fig. 4i).
        In summary, different transcription factor family combinations decorate regions accessible in ST, SW and RS. AP1 and bHLH have dominant roles in respectively regulating increased and decreased chromatin accessibility upon ST, while ETS and GATA are associated with chromatin accessibility in SW and NFAT is strongly linked to enhanced chromatin accessibility upon RS.
      
      
        The enhanced memory response of several genes is ETS-1 dependent
        As motif analysis suggested a role for ETS family members in maintaining chromatin accessibility (Fig. 4) and ETS1 was highly expressed (Fig. S5A), we examined the role of ETS-1 in chromatin accessibility and gene expression. ETS-1 protein was expressed in NS and ST human primary CD4+ naïve and memory cells (Fig. 5a), and ETS-1 ChIP-seq of CD4+ cells (GSE4311936) showed that ETS-1 binds to about half of SW >NS regions (Fig. 5b). ETS-1 protein was present in NS cells and remained stable in ST (Fig. 5c). However, ETS-1 binding at the BIRC3 promoter and TNFSF10 enhancer region was highest in SW (Fig. 5d).
        To assess the contribution of ETS-1 to the memory response, ETS1 was knocked down (Fig. 5e). The enhanced expression of BIRC3, MIR21, TNFSF10, TNF, and PRDM8 in RS cells was consistently reduced in the presence of ETS1 siRNA (Fig. 5f), with decreased expression of TNFSF10 and PRDM8 in SW cells. The effects of ETS1 knockdown on chromatin accessibility were subtler, but consistent chromatin accessibility decreases were observed on RS at the BIRC3, TNF and MIR21 promoter regions and the DUSP10 enhancer (Fig. 5g). Thus, ETS-1 may bind at regions accessible in SW and play a role in enhancing the recruitment of stimulation-induced factors to these regions upon RS.
      
      
        Abrogation of initiating stimuli by rottlerin inhibits aspects of the enhanced 2° response
        PMA activates several PKC isoforms including PKC-θ, which plays a central role in T cell activation8. Treatment with PMA/I induces transcription of genes such as IL2 and TNF associated with T cell activation1112. IL2 and TNF have higher persistent expression in stimulated memory than naïve CD4+ cells2. We used FAIRE-PCR to examine the role of PMA- and I-driven signals in increasing chromatin accessibility at the IL2 and TNF promoters in ST and RS cells (Fig. 6a, Fig. S7A).
        IL2 and TNF expression was higher in RS cells (Fig. 6a), and chromatin accessibility induced in RS was greater than in ST (Fig. 6a). PMA alone increased chromatin accessibility upon initial stimulation (Fig. 6a) and was sufficient to prime cells for enhanced expression in RS even in the absence of increased initial expression (Fig. 6a).
        To further dissect the roles of different T cell signalling pathways in regulating chromatin accessibility, FAIRE-seq was performed on cells pre-treated with the PKC inhibitor rottlerin before 1° stimulation and washed away before 2° stimulation (Fig. S7B). Rottlerin inhibited both an increase and decrease in chromatin accessibility at selected genomic regions in ST, SW, and RS (Fig. S7C,D). In particular, rottlerin treatment influenced a greater proportion of chromatin accessibility increases in RS than ST, with the majority of rottlerin-sensitive regions being from two transcriptional memory sets: 2°-specific set c and stimulation-dependent set b2 (Fig. 6b). Furthermore, those regions with rottlerin-sensitive chromatin accessibility increases in ST had significantly higher chromatin accessibility in RS than ST compared to all ST >NS regions (p < 2 × 10−16, Fig. 6c), suggesting that the rottlerin sensitive pathways were the same as those enhanced upon RS.
        We next used an enrichment approach to identify which transcription factor pathways were affected by rottlerin. When the RS >NS regions were ranked by their chromatin accessibility with and without rottlerin, the NFAT, NFκB, and TCF7L2 motifs were significantly enriched in the regions with higher chromatin accessibility in the absence of rottlerin (p ≤ 0.002, Fig. 6d, Table S1). Interestingly we found that chromatin accessibility at AP1-containing regions was less rottlerin sensitive (Fig. 6d).
        Several memory-responsive genes were within 50 kb of a rottlerin-sensitive RS >NS region (Fig. S8). The enhanced 2° expression of three of these memory-responsive genes - TNF, IL8, and ICOS - was also rottlerin sensitive (Fig. 6e), and we confirmed the rottlerin sensitivity of the chromatin accessibility of the regions using qPCR (Fig. 6f). All three regions contained an NFAT motif (Fig. S8).
        We have previously reported7 that nuclear NFκB family member RelA protein levels are higher in 2°-stimulated Jurkat cells, and this was confirmed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 7a). Furthermore, nuclear NFATC1 levels were also significantly higher in RS cells (Fig. 7a). Nuclear NFATC1 did not increase in RS Hut-78 cells (Fig. 7b), which lack transcriptional memory (unpublished observation). We found that the PKC inhibitor C2737 abrogated the enhanced protein levels of NFAT in the nucleus on RS (Fig. 7c).
        Taken together, perturbation of the 1° signal in our model using the inhibitor rottlerin revealed two interesting findings. Firstly, that there is overlap in the signalling affected by rotterlin, primarily NFAT and NFκB activation, and the signalling enhanced upon RS. Secondly, that the signalling occurring in the initial activation had consequences for the subsequent enhancement of chromatin accessibility and transcription increases upon 2° stimulation.
      
      
        The enhanced 2° response of NFAT is ETS dependent
        Microarray data suggested that enhanced nuclear NFATC1 protein expression in RS cells was due to increased NFATC1 gene expression (Fig. S4A). Chromatin accessibility at the NFATC1 promoter was not maintained in SW cells, but several small chromatin accessibility peaks were present in SW FAIRE-seq upstream of the TSS, with at least one in an area with enhancer chromatin marks in primary CD4+ lymphocytes (Fig. S9A). We confirmed increased chromatin accessibility in SW cells of a region with enhancer chromatin marks by qPCR and found that rottlerin pre-treatment significantly abrogated chromatin accessibility (Fig. 8a). Given that ETS-1 was strongly associated with chromatin accessibility in SW cells, we investigated its role in maintaining chromatin accessibility at this enhancer region. As hypothesised, ETS-1 bound to this region (Fig. 8b), and ETS1 knockdown abrogated the chromatin accessibility on serum withdrawal (Fig. 8c). Future experiments would allow confirmation its interaction with the NFATC1 promoter. ETS1 knockdown also partially inhibited the enhanced NFATC1 mRNA (Fig. 8d) and nuclear protein levels (Fig. 8e) on RS. Interestingly, ETS-1 knockdown decreased the level of NFATC1 protein in the cytoplasm and nucleus (Fig. S9B, Fig. 8e) for all treatments, while its effect on mRNA was limited to RS (Fig. 8d).
        In addition to regulating NFATC1 expression, the ETS binding motif co-existed with the NFATC1 motif in many increased chromatin accessibility regions in RS cells (Fig. 4e). Memory-responsive genes with rottlerin -sensitive RS regions and NFAT motifs play important roles in the immune response and include transcription factors, cytokines, receptors, and signalling molecules (Fig. 8f). Interestingly, many of these regions also contained an ETS motif, with many containing an overlapping NFAT-ETS motif (Fig. 8f). Thus, ETS together with PKC pathway-induced factors may promote NFAT activity in several different ways that together play a major role in the enhanced chromatin accessibility and transcriptional 2° response of pre-activated T cells.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Various immune cells maintain memory of previous activation and produce different transcriptional responses upon 2° activation than occur upon 1° activation3438. There is growing evidence that this transcriptional memory is encoded in the epigenome18343839. Here we used a human T cell culture model with stimuli acting downstream of cell surface signalling to explore if the chromatin accessibility landscape “remembers” previous activation and to identify the transcription factors required to establish and enhance the chromatin accessibility changes associated with rapid gene expression upon re-stimulation. In doing so, we highlight the likely combinatory action of transcription factors in regulating inducible genes with memory.
      We found that the transcription of many memory-responsive genes corresponded to regions with increased chromatin accessibility in RS, which were often located away from the transcriptional start site in cell type-specific enhancer regions. Studies using a TNF enhancer region have shown it to interact more strongly with the TNF promoter in PMA/I-stimulated T cells27. However, examination of three interactions in our model revealed that these enhancer regions were already in close proximity to transcriptional start sites in naïve T cells. Several other studies have found evidence for promoter-enhancer interactions in the absence of gene expression304041, suggesting the existence of pre-established (“permissive”) and de novo (“instructive”) loops42. Most similar to our study, inducible genes such as CCL2 already had enhancer-promoter loops in the absence of the TNF treatment that induces their expression. The three interactions we examined appear to be “permissive loops”, with increased accessibility at the enhancers in the SW state a secondary step and RS-dependent factors a tertiary step to enhanced expression. Although beyond the scope of the current study, It would be informative to examine additional enhancers and to utilise other methods such as ChiA-PET to investigate interactions in the JTM.
      In examining all the different chromatin accessibility change profiles in our JTM model, we identified four groups with greater chromatin accessibility in RS than ST: (i) stimulation-dependent (set b2); (ii) persistent transcriptional memory (set e2); (iii) delayed and maintained response (set f); and (iv) 2°-specific (set c). We propose that all four groups contribute to memory-responsive gene induction and, in agreement with others38, that different regions act together to modulate transcription. For instance, NFATC1, FASLG, TNFSF10, and DUSP10 had multiple nearby chromatin accessibility regions. It is increasingly apparent that not only do multiple regions regulate transcription of a target gene, but that chromatin accessibility at each of these regions is regulated by a combination of transcription factors that contribute differently at various activation stages.
      The stimulation-dependent (set b2) group contained motifs for transcription factor families such as NFAT, NFκB, NR4A, and AP1. For this set, the most likely cause of increased chromatin accessibility in RS cells is increased activation of these transcription factors (Fig. 9). While chromatin accessibility at these regions increased in RS compared to ST cells, the increases were not maintained in SW cells when nuclear levels of these transcription factors decreased. It is possible that, as in macrophages, H3K4me1 is maintained at these regions34 and some of these regions change chromatin state in memory CD4+ lymphocytes.
      The persistent (set e2) and delayed (set f) group were enriched for the ETS motif. ETS-1 is constitutively expressed in Jurkat cells, and our results suggest it may play a role in chromatin accessibility in NS in regulatory regions that lose chromatin accessibility upon stimulation (such as set h). Similar to the role of the ETS family member PU.1 in macrophages34, some regions appeared to require other transcription factors to modify the chromatin at regions before ETS-1 can bind. Our work and that of ref. 38 suggest that, in lymphocyte activation, members of the AP1, NFAT, EGR, and NFκB families execute this role. AP1 has previously been shown to tether ETS-1 to genes such as TIMP143. However, once ETS-1 binds DNA, it appears to be able to maintain chromatin’s open state.
      Consistent with its role in memory lymphocyte enhancer regions36 and in agreement with the murine lymphocyte study of ref. 38, ETS-1 binding was increased in pre-activated resting lymphocytes, suggesting a role for ETS-1 in maintaining chromatin accessibility (Fig. 9). A recent study44 on chromatin accessibility in Tregs showed that ETS bound sites were accessible before Foxp3 was present and that ETS might keep these sites open for Foxp3. At the NFATC1 enhancer, ETS1 knockdown partially inhibited chromatin accessibility at regions such as the BIRC3 promoter, but, surprisingly, had more of an effect on increasing chromatin accessibility in RS than SW cells. This could be due to incomplete knockdown or redundancy with other ETS family members such as ELF-1 or ETV5, or it could suggest a more complex role for ETS in regulating increased chromatin accessibility in RS. ETS-1 and other ETS family members are known to recruit histone acetylases4546, and the presence of ETS-1 may affect histone acetylation in SW cells and play a role in recruiting factors that control enhanced chromatin accessibility in RS or recruiting other transcription factors.
      ETS motifs also marked the 2°-specific set (c). However, the NFAT motif appeared to be most critical for determining these regions, and several known NFAT targets including CSF2, EGR2, NR4A2, IL8, FASLG, and TNF are near these regions15474849. Alone, NFAT members only weakly bind DNA, and its regulation of transcription co-depends on AP1, GATA, and EGR members4850, a phenomenon highlighted by our examination of motif co-occurrence in set c with NFκB, NR4A, GATA, and EGR motifs also being enriched. Different transcription factor combinations may also continue to affect the immunological outcome, such that NFAT-AP1 co-binding induces immune response genes, while NFAT binding without AP1 induces anergy-associated genes47.
      The activities of several members of the NFAT family (except for NFAT5) are regulated by calcium signalling48. NFAT5 and NFATC1 show inducible expression51, with NFATC1 induced more in CD4+ memory cells than naïve cells73852. NFATC1 and NFAT5 were both induced in Jurkats, with NFATC1 induced more in RS. NFATC1 induction is under the control of two alternative promoters and at least one intronic enhancer53. While auto-regulation plays a large role in the induction of NFATC1, NFκB has also been shown to bind to and regulate one of the promoters (P1)5153. Increased NFAT activation upon RS may be partly due to higher NFκB activity acting through P1. There was more nuclear RelA protein accumulation and higher expression of REL and NFKB1 in RS in the JTM, consistent with greater NFκB activity on activation in primary memory than naïve cells54. However, it is likely that there is more than one cause of enhanced NFATC1 induction in memory T cells. We also identified a region upstream of NFATC1 that became accessible in SW cells and has enhancer chromatin marks in CD4 lymphocytes; we propose that this could act as an NFATC1 enhancer, although further experiments would allow confirmation of its interaction with the NFATC1 promoter. This region was bound by ETS-1 in SW cells and may be responsible for the ETS-1-dependent NFATC1 induction. While the decreased nuclear levels of NFATC1 in RS cells on ETS1 knockdown could be attributable to decreased transcript, the inhibitory effect in ST cells appeared to be independent of mRNA levels. This may implicate ETS-1 and/or its targets in the control of NFAT protein stability.
      In addition to regulating NFATC1 mRNA, ETS-1 and NFAT physically interact in T cell nuclei, and NFAT recruitment to the IL2 promoter decreases in the absence of ETS55. There is partial ETS and NFAT binding motif overlap (Fig. 8f), resulting in many NFAT targets containing composite sites. Hence, increased ETS-1 in SW may help to recruit NFAT more quickly to the enhancers of memory-responsive genes.
      NFAT is implicated in regulating chromatin accessibility via recruitment of remodellers BRG and BRM56 and histone modifiers such as p30057. Acetylases such as p300 are thought to maintain transcriptional memory39. We found that increased chromatin accessibility was associated with the development/widening of an NFR, increased relative H3.3 levels, and, in some cases, relative histone acetylation. Interestingly, these changes were inherited through cell divisions. This is unlikely to be due to DNA methylation due to the low CG content of the regions (results not shown) but is thought to be linked to BRD4 binding38.
      Our motif co-occurrence analysis showed that an important determinant of enhanced chromatin accessibility upon re-stimulation was the absence of a bHLH or ZEB motif. The repressors ZEB2 and ID2 are memory-responsive genes in the JTM model and ZEB2 is an NFAT target47. There was further decreased chromatin accessibility of regions with the ZEB binding motif in RS or increased chromatin accessibility only in ST (Fig. 9). Thus, NFAT may also indirectly regulate the further decrease in chromatin accessibility in RS.
      In addition to being dependent on ETS-1, NFATC1 enhancer chromatin accessibility was dependent on PKC signalling in ST. Partial abrogation of the initial PKC signal by rottlerin not only affected chromatin accessibility in ST but continued to affect chromatin accessibility in SW and RS. The regions most sensitive to rottlerin in RS were marked by NFAT and NFκB motifs, while fewer of those with AP1 motifs were affected. We found that NFAT nuclear accumulation was dependent on PKC-θ signalling using the C27 inhibitor. NFκB inhibition by rottlerin was expected, as NFκB is a known PKC signalling target13. We previously7 found that stimulation-dependent NFATC1 expression in CD4+ naïve and memory T cells is PKC-θ dependent by siRNA knockdown. Furthermore, the PKC-θ inhibitor AEB071 inhibits NFκB and NFAT but not AP1 activity58. The results with rottlerin suggest that naïve cells exposed to different initial stimuli may be primed differently for gene expression upon re-stimulation. Differential TCR signalling strength and quality affect not only the development of the memory phenotype, but also TCM/TEM balance1459. It would be informative to study the epigenomes of lymphocytes with differing activation signals to determine if they are poised differently. Indeed, it was interesting that we observed differences in the relative accessibility in memory and naïve lymphocytes between individuals. The extent of these differences and how they relate to the individual’s ability to induce the corresponding genes remains to be determined. Differences in the CD4+ lymphocyte epigenomes of individuals have been found to relate to factors such as disease status and age606162 and factors such as TCM/TEM balance may also play a role.
      In conclusion, we show that T cell activation irreversibly changes the chromatin landscape and affects subsequent gene expression profiles if the cells are re-stimulated. NFATC1 and ETS play important roles in enhanced 2° responses, and the strength of initial PKC signalling affects chromatin accessibility changes via NFAT and NFKB motifs.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Jurkat T cell culture
        Human Jurkat T cells (Clone E6-1, ATCC TIB-152) were pre-treated with either DMSO, 15 μM rottlerin (Calbiochem, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA), or 1 μM C27 (SYNthesis med chem, Parkville, Victoria) for 1 h (rottlerin) or 2 h (C27) followed by stimulation with 24 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI) and/or 1 μM calcium ionophore (I; Sigma-Aldrich) for 2h at a density of 5 × 105 /mL. Primary activated Jurkat T cells were washed three times with stimulus-free medium and re-cultured for up to six days prior to PMA/I re-stimulation as previously described7. Jurkat and HUT-78 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and 4 mM L-glutamine.
      
      
        Human T cell isolation
        Human blood was obtained from healthy volunteers recruited after obtaining informed written consent in accordance with QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute Human Research Ethics Guidelines and approved by the QIMR ethics committee, ethics approval number P158. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from heparinised blood by Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) density centrifugation and labelled with CD8α-PerCP, CD4-PE Cy7, CD3-APC, CCR7-Alexa Fluor700, and CD45RA-FITC (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) antibodies and subsequently sorted for CD4+ naïve (CD45RA+ CCR7+ CD27+) and memory (CD45RA−) cells using the FACS Aria (BD Biosciences) cell sorter.
      
      
        Flow cytometry
        For carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) analysis, previously stimulated (2 h) Jurkat cells were incubated with CFSE (10 μM) in PBS (with FCS 5%) for 10 min before being washed and re-cultured in RPMI. Fluorescence was measured using the LSRII flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and analysed with FlowJo. The background fluorescence of unstained cells was subtracted from each intensity measurement, and the values were compared to day 0 cells. One cell division was presumed to be equal to a 2-fold intensity decrease.
        For Ets-1 intracellular staining, PBMCs from healthy volunteers were stained with CD3 AF700, CD4 BV605, and CD45RO Texas Red monoclonal antibodies (BD Biosciences) then permeabilised and fixed using the FoxP3 permeabilisation solution kit (BioLegend, San Diego, CA). The fixed cells were then stained with the Ets-1 antibody directly conjugated to Alexa 647: IgG1 monoclonal antibody, 8A8 clone, (1/100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) or isotype control IgG1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
      
      
        Ets-1 siRNA transfection
        Jurkat T cells were transfected with Ets-1 siRNAs (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) using the NeonTM Transfection System Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Control siRNA-A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used as negative control. Briefly, Jurkat T cells were re-suspended in Neon Re-suspension Buffer R at a concentration of 2 × 107 /mL, and each construct was transfected at a final concentration of 200 nM per 1 × 106 Jurkat T cells in a 100 μl transfection volume using the Neon electroporation transfection system. Cells were cultured in 2 mL of antibiotic-free medium at a density of 5 × 105 /ml in 6-well plates for 2 days followed by PMA/I stimulation. Cells were rested for three days after stimulus withdrawal and re-stimulated.
      
      
        Western blotting
        Western blot analysis of Jurkat cell nuclear extracts was performed using a primary anti-rabbit antibody to Ets-1 (SC-350) and a secondary HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (AP187P; Merck Millipore). Signals were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence with film exposure. The intensity of bands of the correct molecular weight were analysed with ImageJ, and protein loading was normalised with a highly sensitive quantitative total protein loading control detection kit (Novex Reversible Membrane Protein Stain Kit, Novex, Invitrogen).
      
      
        Immunofluorescence microscopy
        Cells were permeabilised by incubation with 2% Triton X-100 for 20 min. Cells were probed with primary antibodies to either NFATC1 or Rela followed by visualisation with secondary rabbit (A10042; Life Technologies), mouse (A31574; Life Technologies), goat (A11055; Life Technologies) immunoglobulins conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, 568, or 633 nm and co-stained with DAPI. Staining was analysed by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Single 0.5 μm image stacks were obtained using a Nikon x 60 oil immersion lens on the Nikon C1 plus confocal system and the final image obtained by averaging four sequential images from the same tissue section. Digital confocal images were analysed with Fiji-ImageJ software63 to determine the total nuclear fluorescence intensity (TNFI) by selecting a region of interest (ROI) corresponding to the nucleus with background subtracted measured in a minimum of 20 cells for each sample set.
      
      
        RNA extraction and quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR)
        Total RNA was extracted from Jurkat cells using TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen) followed by chloroform extraction (Sigma) and isopropanol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) precipitation. First-strand cDNA was synthesised from 1 μg total RNA using the SuperScriptTM III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen). qRT-PCR was carried out to determine gene expression with gene-specific TaqMan probes in the Applied Biosystems® ViiATM 7 Real-Time PCR System (Life Technologies). The sequences of all primers used in this study are listed in Table S2 in the supplemental material.
      
      
        Chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay
        The 3C assay was performed according to ref. 31, except that DpnII (Genesearch, Arundel, Australia) was used as the restriction enzyme. DNA was quantified by SYBR real-time PCR with the primer sets listed in Table S2. 3C-qPCR data were normalised to a GAPDH loading control and primer efficiency was normalised to bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones including gene deserts (GD), DUSP10, TNFSF10, and BCL6 (Life Technologies).
      
      
        Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
        ChIP-PCR was performed with Magna ChIPTM Protein A Magnetic Beads (Merck Millipore) as described previously64. ChIP-DNA enrichment was performed with antibodies targeting H2AZ, H2AZAc, H3, H3.3, H3K27ac, H3K56ac, and Ets1. ChIP-DNA was quantified by real-time PCR with the primer sets listed in Table S2 in the supplemental material.
      
      
        Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE)
        FAIRE samples were prepared as outlined in ref. 65. Briefly, cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde and lysed. The cell lysates were sonicated to yield an average DNA fragment distribution of approximately 200 to 500 bp. A 50 μL aliquot of fragmented DNA (total input control DNA) was reverse cross-linked at 65 °C followed by phenol-chloroform extraction. The remaining sonicated DNA (FAIRE DNA) was directly isolated by phenol-chloroform extraction and purified using the Zymo-SpinTM I kit (Zymo Research). 50 ng of FAIRE DNA and the corresponding total input DNA were used to prepare the FAIRE-seq DNA library using the NEBNext® Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (New England BioLabs Inc., Ipswich, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. FAIRE DNA libraries were single-end 50 bp sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000 at the Ramaciotti Centre for Genomics, University of New South Wales, Sydney.
      
      
        Bioinformatics analysis
        FAIRE sequencing reads were stripped of adapter sequences with CutAdapt66, mapped to the human (Hg19) genome with global alignment in Bowtie267, and duplicate reads were removed with Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net). Areas of enrichment in the DMSO FAIRE samples compared to the total input sample were determined using MACS268 with the Broad option and using a q-value cut-off of ≤0.05. Regions from the four DMSO samples were pooled (in Galaxy) with overlapping regions merged into one. In total, 40,731 regions were detected (28 were removed because they were on chrM or chrUn). Reads were extended to 200 bp and the number of sequencing reads in each region for all samples (DMSO and rottlerin treated) were counted in R. The counts were MA normalised to each other in R. Using the NS DMSO and rottlerin treated comparison as a guide, a 1.75-fold change with a minimum read number of 30 was used as a cut-off for calling regions with changed CA. Based on the NS comparison, this was expected to give 242 regions as false positives or a 8.5–14.5% false positive rate.
        The mid-points of the regions were annotated to the nearest ENSEMBL transcript using the ChIPpeakAnno package in R. As a region can be annotated to more than one transcript, regions were allocated to groups in the following order: 5′UTR, 3′UTR, exon, intron, promoter, upstream, and intergenic. A promoter was defined as the area −1 kb to 0 bp from the TSS and upstream was defined as −10 kb to −1 kb from the TSS. Regions were also annotated to RoadMap CD4+ memory chromatin state data22 and ChIP-seq data from naïve, memory, and PMA/I activated Th CD4+ cells donor 62 (GSE17312). Homer69 was used to profile the RoadMap histone marks +/−1 kb (0.1 kb bins) around the FAIRE peaks, and values were scaled by total mapped reads. Wilcoxon tests were performed with continuity correction in R. DAVID70 was used to look for over-represented Gene Ontology groups in the genes nearest to the accessible regions. ST >NS, SW >NS, and RS >NS regions were compared to the NS region background. A p value <0.05 and FDR <25% cut-off were used to determine significance, and groups had to have at least 10 genes present. Homer69 and CLOVER (with JASPAR PWM database)71 were used to identify over-represented transcription factor binding motifs. For both programs, the regions were standardised to 300 bp (or 500 bp for co-occupancy) and while HOMER uses genomic regions with similar GC content as background, for CLOVER NS regions were used as background. Motifs had to have a q (HOMER) or p (CLOVER) value of ≤0.05. GSEA72 was used to investigate the motif occurrence significance in regions differentially affected by rottlerin treatment, with sets of regions (set to 300 bp) containing JASPAR motifs (at least 2 motif occurrences, from CLOVER) instead of the usual gene lists. Regions were ranked using fold-changes, and region (‘gene’) permutation was used to establish significance. Motif co-occupancy was analysed in R using output from the CLOVER program and custom scripts (available on request). To explore the combinatory effect of different factors on chromatin accessibility outcomes, we examined every pairwise combination of the 14 enriched motifs in all regions with altered chromatin accessibility (a–n). We determined how many of the regions with both motifs belonged to a particular set as a percentage of all the sets (a-n) with altered chromatin accessibility. We also compared the composition of regions with 1 motif but not the other. Furthermore, based on the pairwise combinations, we examined several 3 motif combinations.
        Genes were classified as primary response genes or memory-responsive genes if they had at least log2 0.5 greater expression in ST (day 0, primary response genes) or RS cells (day 9, memory-responsive genes) compared to NS and either RS (primary response genes) or ST cells (memory-responsive genes). Expression for Jurkat cells from GSE611727 and primary cells from E-MEXP-2578.
        FAIRE data was deposited in GEO under accession number GSE63766.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Juan Tu, W. et al. Priming of transcriptional memory responses via the chromatin accessibility landscape in T cells. Sci. Rep.
7, 44825; doi: 10.1038/srep44825 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Data and Information
        
        
      
    
  
        SWItchMiner (SWIM) is a wizard-like software implementation of a procedure, previously described, able to extract information contained in complex networks. Specifically, SWIM allows unearthing the existence of a new class of hubs, called “fight-club hubs”, characterized by a marked negative correlation with their first nearest neighbors. Among them, a special subset of genes, called “switch genes”, appears to be characterized by an unusual pattern of intra- and inter-module connections that confers them a crucial topological role, interestingly mirrored by the evidence of their clinic-biological relevance. Here, we applied SWIM to a large panel of cancer datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas, in order to highlight switch genes that could be critically associated with the drastic changes in the physiological state of cells or tissues induced by the cancer development. We discovered that switch genes are found in all cancers we studied and they encompass protein coding genes and non-coding RNAs, recovering many known key cancer players but also many new potential biomarkers not yet characterized in cancer context. Furthermore, SWIM is amenable to detect switch genes in different organisms and cell conditions, with the potential to uncover important players in biologically relevant scenarios, including but not limited to human cancer.
      
    Real-world networks (such as technological, social, and biological networks) are virtually always organized in cohesive groups of nodes (communities, modules, clusters) that often correspond to distinct functional units1234. This confers a sort of modular organization to these networks where the graph ‘modularity’ can be used to quantify the extent to which nodes are ‘close’ to each others. The concept of proximity is measured by a distance metric (i.e. weights of the edges) used by the myriad of existing algorithms for detecting communities in networks235. The community structure of real-word networks is one of the non-trivial topological features (including also a heavy-tailed degree distribution, a high clustering coefficient, and assortativity or disassortativity among nodes) that do not occur in simple networks such as random graphs, but are characteristic of complex networks, whose study was indeed inspired by the empirical study of real-world networks.
    One of the key problems in complex networks analysis is to classify nodes in the network as a whole. Usually, this problem is solved by using different centrality measurements (degree, closeness, betweenness, eigenvector centrality, etc …). An alternative approach is the categorization of hubs according to the date/party dichotomy, defined in ref. 6 for protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks in yeast, that assigns roles to hubs (i.e. nodes with degree at least equal to 5, where degree refers to the number of links outgoing from a node) purely on the basis of gene expression data rather than on the basis of network topology. The authors in ref. 6 examined the extent to which hubs are co-expressed with their linked nodes (interaction partners) in the yeast interactome. By computing the averaged Pearson correlation coefficient (APCC) of expression over all interaction partners of each hub, they concluded that hubs fall into two distinct categories: date hubs that display low co-expression with their partners (low APCC) and party hubs that have high co-expression (high APCC). It was proposed that date and party hubs play different roles in the modular organization of the network: party hubs are thought to coordinate single functions performed by a group of proteins (i.e. nodes in the PPI network) that are all expressed at the same time (i.e. party hubs are local coordinators), whereas date hubs are described as higher-level connectors between groups that perform varying functions and are active at different times or under different conditions (i.e. date hubs are global connectors).
    By computationally partitioning metabolic networks into functionally coherent subnetworks, the authors in refs 7 and 8 show that the roles of nodes could be more diverse than allowed by a binary classification and could be related to the group structure of the network. In particular, nodes are classified into a small number of system-independent ‘universal roles’ based on the connectivity of each node both within its own community and to other communities. This enables a coarse-grained, and thus simplified, description of the network that the authors in refs 7 and 8 called ‘cartographic representation’ of complex networks. This role assignment is based on the general idea that nodes with the same role should have similar topological properties. In ref. 5 the authors examined the extent to which these structural roles match up with the date/party hypothesis, finding little evidence to support it.
    Inspired by the Guimerà-Amaral approach78 and by the node-based date/party categorization, we have recently proposed9 a new approach to the problem of nodes classification in the context of the modular organization of gene expression networks. By combining topological role classification and gene expression data, our methodology paves the way for a reconciliation of the date/party hypothesis with the topology. Most importantly, our methodology provides a fast and systematic way to identify a small pool of key regulatory genes, that we called switch genes, which are likely to be critically associated with drastic changes in many biological settings. We set our approach by studying the transition between mature to immature phase of the developmental program of grapevine (Vitis Vinifera)9 and found that switch genes are master regulators of the previously reported transcriptome remodeling9 that marks the developmental shift from immature to mature growth10.
    Here, taking advantage from the vast human cancer data available from The Cancer Genome Atlas11, we present an application of the algorithm to the identification of switch genes in several human cancers along with its wizard-like Graphical User Interphase (GUI) implementation called SWIM (for Switch Miner).
    
      Results
      
        Identification of fight-club hubs in human cancer gene correlation networks
        The date/party distinction was originally motivated by an approximately bimodal distribution of hub co-expression (i.e. APCC) in PPI networks. Recently, we applied this hub classification to study the topological properties of genes, as opposed to proteins, in the gene expression network of Vitis Vinifera9. A detailed description on how to build a gene expression network using the Pearson correlation, in general and not limited to the case of grapevine, is provided in the User Guide (Supplementary File 1, step 3 of the SWIM algorithm), a practical document that describes how SWIM work and to use it. Shortly, in a gene expression network nodes are RNA transcripts and an edge occurs between two nodes if their expression profiles are highly correlated or anti-correlated (i.e. if the absolute value of the Pearson correlation coefficient between the expression profiles of two nodes exceeds a given cutoff).
        Differently to PPI networks, the hub classification based on the APCC in the gene expression network of Vitis Vinifera strikingly led to a trimodal distribution of the hub APCC values9, with two peaks in correspondence to low and high positive APCC values that resemble date and party hubs of the PPI networks, respectively. However, we also discovered a new third peak, which is unmatched in PPI networks and represents negative APCC values. We called nodes populating this peak fight-club hubs9.
        Here, we perform the same analysis as for Vitis Vinifera by exploiting the large panel of TCGA cancer datasets11. Strikingly, we recovered an approximately trimodal distribution of the hub APCC values (see Supplementary Fig. 1) in each gene expression network built for each single TCGA cancer dataset, which enabled us to identify fight-club hubs also in human cancers.
        In order to detect communities in our correlation networks, we scored node proximity based on the following distance metric:
        
          
            
          
        
        where r(x, y) is the Pearson correlation coefficient between the expression profiles of two linked nodes x, y. Thus, two nodes are close (belonging to the same community) if they are moderately to highly correlated (d → 0), while they are far apart (lying in different communities) if they are poorly correlated or moderately to highly anti-correlated (d → 2).
        Accordingly, most inter-community interactions would connect to fight-club hubs or, at most, date hubs. On the contrary, most intra-community interactions would connect to party hubs. In fact, inter-community interactions occur between any two nodes that, belonging to different communities, display a negative or poorly positive correlation (i.e. high values of d). Thus, the corresponding APCC will necessarily range from negative to poorly positive values. Along the same line, since intra-community interactions occur between highly-correlated nodes (i.e. low values of d), the APCC will be necessarily confined to highly positive values.
        This interesting relation observed between the hub classification and the network community structure is in perfect accord with the topological roles that date and party hubs should fulfill in the model of organized modularity proposed in ref. 6: date hubs are supposed to connect different biological processes performed by ‘player’ acting at different place and time, while party hubs are supposed to interact with their partners simultaneously.
        Completely different situation concerns fight-club hubs that, having no analogue in the PPI networks, constitute a new, potentially fascinating, territory yet to be explored. Likewise date hubs, they are supposed to connect different biological processes but differently from them, fight-club hubs display an opposite transcriptional pattern with respect to their interaction partners: if they are induced their interaction partners are repressed, and viceversa. Although it is not possible to infer a causal relationship by time-independent gene expression data, this scenario is compatible with a function of negative regulation of at least a sub-set of fight-club hubs on their partners. Indeed, it is know that the human genome is pervasively transcribed12, yet at any given spatio/temporal state a cell generally uses only a fraction of its gene functions. Thus, suggesting a crucial role of negative regulation to save cells from activation of specific pathways and cell functions in response to specific external stimuli or physiological and/or pathological changes. As an example, microRNAs (miRNAs) are now universally recognized as key negative regulators in many intracellular processes as well as in cancer development and progression1314151617.
      
      
        Identification of switch genes in human cancer gene correlation networks
        The authors in refs 7 and 8 defined two parameters: the participation coefficient P that measures how much a node ‘communicates’ with any module (including its own) and the within-module degree z that measures how ‘well-connected’ a node is to other nodes in its module. In this sense, P represents a global measure of connectivity, whereas z is essentially a local measurement of connectivity. The formal definitions of P and z for a generic node i are the following78:
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            
          
        
        where Ci is the own cluster of node i;  is the number of links of node i to other nodes in Ci (internal degree);  and  are, respectively, the average and the standard deviation of the internal degree distribution of the all nodes in Ci;  is the number of links of node i to other nodes in the generic cluster s (including its own that is s = Ci and ); ki is the total degree of node i. The sum extends to all N modules of the network.
        The higher the number of clusters with which a node is connected (including its own), the greater the value of P (see Supplementary Fig. 2). Thus, this approach assigns a high value of the participation coefficient P to those nodes that have links uniformly distributed among all modules (including their own), leading to an upper limit for P that is susceptible to changes in the number of clusters used to partition the network:
        
          
            
          
        
        In light of this, the region R4 of the Guimerà-Amaral cartography, populated by the ‘non-hub kinless nodes’ and corresponding to high values of the participation coefficient (P > 0.8), results completely emptied as long as the number of clusters is small, i.e. for N < 6 (see Supplementary Fig. 3). As a consequence, structural roles appear to be assigned to nodes depending on the number of clusters used by the network partitioning instead of relying on their functional relevance in the network.
        By emphasizing the difference between the intra-module and inter-module connections, we revisited in ref. 9 the node roles definition given in refs 7 and 8. Specifically, we defined in ref. 9 a new statistic, the clusterphobic coefficient Kπ, which measures the ‘fear’ of each node of being confined in a cluster, in analogy with the claustrophobic disorder:
        
          
            
          
        
        where  and ki are the internal and the total degree of node i, respectively. Kπ measures the ratio of internal to external connections and assumes its minimum values (Kπ = 0) when a node has only links within its own module, i.e. it does not ‘communicates’ to other modules (). On the contrary, Kπ approaches to its maximum (Kπ → 1) when a node interacts mainly outside its own community ().
        Similarly to the participation coefficient P, the clusterphobic coefficient Kπ represents a measure of global connectivity. However, our definition of Kπ envisages an upper limit (Kπ = 1) that is essentially topological in nature and is thus identifiable from the network rather than depending on network partitioning.
        Comparing the two definitions of the participant coefficient, we obtain:
        
          
            
          
        
        where the first term () represents the contribution to Pi coming from the interactions of the node i within its own community with respect to its total interactions, while the second term (the sum) represents the contribution due to the interactions of the node i with all the other communities with respect to its total interactions. Thus, P is always lower than Kπ and is getting closer to Kπ the more the links of the node i deviate from being uniformly distributed among all modules, but rather displaying a preferential direction of interactions towards the cluster to which the node i belongs. Indeed, they approach the same lower bound () when the node i has only links within its own module.
        We also generalized in ref. 9 the within-module degree definition of Guimerà-Amaral78 by defining a global within-module degree zg that measures how a node is ‘well-connected’ to other nodes in its own module with respect to their global connectivity:
        
          
            
          
        
        where  is the number of links of node i to nodes in its module Ci;  and  are the average and standard deviation of the total degree distribution of the nodes in the module Ci. Differently from the clusterphobic coefficient Kπ, the global within-module degree zg represents a measure of local connectivity.
        The values of the two statistics, the global within-module degree and the clusterphobic coefficient, divide the plane (Kπ, zg) into seven regions encompassing seven possible roles. Similarly to78, this yields to a cartographic representation of a gene expression network where we added a further characterisation of the nodes by coloring them according to the their expression APCC, obtaining what we called heat cartography map9 (see Supplementary Fig. 4).
        Of note, our categorization of date, party, and fight-club hubs, indicates that a correlation between expression APCC and structural roles can be supported (see Supplementary Fig. 5). In fact, according to their definitions, party hubs function mainly inside modules and, consistently, we found their maximum density in the regions R1 and R2 of the heat cartography that are populated by ‘peripheral nodes’ and characterized by low values of the clusterphobic coefficient. Date hubs, interacting with different modules at different time and place, reasonably reach their highest density in the region R3 that is populated by ‘non-hub connectors’ and characterized by moderate values of the clusterphobic coefficient. Finally, fight-club hubs, acting as negative regulators, mainly fall in the region R4 that is characterized by high values of the clusterphobic coefficient and by a strong inclination of nodes to ‘leave’ their own community (i.e. these nodes interact mostly outside their own community). We called this subset of fight-club hubs lying in the region R4 switch genes9 that are thus characterized by the following topological features:To mainly interact outside their own community (high values of Kπ).To be not local hubs (low values of zg).To be mainly anti-correlated with their interaction partners (negative APCC).
        Our nodes classification differs from the one proposed in refs 7 and 8 mainly with respect to the definition of the clusterphobic coefficient vs. the participation coefficient (see equation 5) that in turn determines which nodes populate the region R4. Importantly, from this derives the possibility or not to identify switch genes, whose main feature is that they mainly interact outside their community regardless of the number of clusters toward which these interactions are targeted. In principle, it is sufficient that a node interacts with at least one cluster in addition to its own, as long as the number of connections to this cluster are greater than the internal ones, to be classified as switch gene. In this case, the participation coefficient would be very small whereas the clusterphobic coefficient would be very high. As a consequence, following the Guimerà-Amaral approach, switch genes would have never been identified or, even worse, they would have been classified as ‘peripheral nodes’ instead of as important connectors of the gene expression network (see Supplementary Fig. 6). In particular, according to our node roles definition, switch genes appear to convey information between different function-specific modules by acting as important negative regulators of their interaction partners: if they are activated their interactors are switched off, if they are inactivated their interactors are switched on. In this sense, they can also be referred to as bottlenecks.
        In support of this hypothesis, our recent study on grapevin9 found that switch genes - mainly involved in secondary metabolism (color, aroma and flavor of the fruit) - are over-expressed in mature organs and highly anti-correlated with thousands of genes that are down-regulated in mature organs and mainly involved in primary metabolisms that are related to vegetative growth (such as photosynthesis and cell proliferation). This evidence suggests that the transition to mature growth predominantly involves the suppression of vegetative pathways rather than the activation of maturation-specific pathways. This strongly supports the importance of a negative regulation both at transcriptional and post-transcriptional level.
      
      
        Topological relevance of fight-club hubs and switch genes in human cancer gene correlation networks
        We systematically explored the topological relevance of fight-club hubs and switch genes in the gene expression networks built from the large panel of TCGA cancer datasets11. All these human cancer correlation networks show a power law behavior of the degree distribution probability function indicating that most genes interact with few partners, whereas a small but significant proportion of genes, the hubs, interact with many partners (see Supplementary Fig. 7). It’s well known that networks with a degree distribution following a power law are amazingly resistant to random node removal but are extremely sensitive to the targeted removal of hubs that causes the destruction of the network integrity, an effect known as ‘vulnerability to attack’618. This property offers a way to test the relevance of nodes with respect to the overall network connectivity, which can be measured by the average shortest path - where the shortest path between two nodes is the minimum number of edges connecting them and the average shortest path is the mean of the shortest paths for all possible pairs of nodes in the network.
        We investigated whether fight-club, date, and party hubs have distinct topological properties by evaluating the effects produced on the human cancer correlation networks upon their deletion (see Supplementary Fig. 8). Removing date hubs led to a very rapid increase of the average shortest path presumably indicating a very rapid disintegration of the network into multiple components. On the contrary, removal of party hubs exerted much less effect on global connectivity, whereas the random removal of nodes does not effect the integrity of the network letting almost unchanged the average shortest path. Thus, the different effects on the overall topology resulting from the removal of date and party hubs appear to mirror their well-known distinct topological properties in the PPI network and supports the hypothesis of date hubs as higher-level connectors between groups. Strikingly, the removal of fight-club hubs produces a drastic increase of the average shortest path that is in most cases very similar to the effect caused by the deletion of date hubs. Evaluating the contribute of switch genes to the robustness (i.e. resilience to errors) of the network, we found that the drastic effect observed on the deletion of fight-club hubs, was largely due to their subset of switch genes rather than being a generic property of the entire set of fight-club hubs (see Supplementary Fig. 8).
        Hence, despite not being amongst the top ranked hubs (i.e. about 30 hubs with degree greater than the 98th percentile of the degree distribution), switch genes appear to be critical nodes in preserving the integrity of the human cancer co-expression networks.
      
      
        Clinical relevance of switch genes in human breast invasive carcinoma
        Breast cancer is the second most common cancer worldwide after lung cancer, the fifth most common cause of cancer death, and the leading cause of cancer death in women. The global burden of breast cancer alone exceeds all other cancers and its incidence rates are increasing. In light of these frightening statistics and motived by the relevance of identifying new potential ‘high risk’ breast cancer susceptibility genes, we first focused on the analysis of the results obtained by applying SWIM on the TCGA dataset of breast invasive carcinoma (see Fig. 1).
        Our algorithm identified 257 switch genes, out of 1710 differentially expressed genes (i.e. 15%), including protein coding genes as well as long non-coding RNAs and miRNAs (see Supplementary Table 1). Of note, among switch genes we found many well-known cancer-related mRNAs (such as BIRC5, AURKA, RAD51, MBL and EZH2)1920212223 as well as oncogenic miRNAs (such as the miR-200 family, miR-21, miR-203, miR-210, the miR-182/183/96 cluster)2425262728. This supports the reliability of the selection made by our analysis and opens new challenges in determining the role played in breast cancer by the switch genes that are not yet characterized in this context (see Supplementary Table 1).
        Seeking to probe the clinical relevance of these cancer-deregulated genes, we first investigated their prognostic value by performing a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for each of them. Patients were stratified in two cohorts based on the given switch gene expression levels (low or high) and a log-rank test was performed to assess the p-value (where the lower the p-value, the better the separation between the two prognosis groups). Finally, the switch genes were sorted by increasing p-values in order to identify the best at separating the two prognosis groups (see Supplementary Table 2). Importantly, we found that switch genes generally have a great prognostic value in predicting the overall survival. Among the top ten, we found BRCA1-interacting protein C-terminal helicase 1 (BRIP1), whose low-expression level was associated with improved overall survival in breast invasive carcinoma patients (see Fig. 2a). In addition, comparative analysis of the median expression levels of BRIP1 between different patient subgroups identified based on hormone receptor status (i.e. estrogen receptor ER, progesterone receptor PR, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 HER-2), molecular subtypes (i.e. basal-like, luminal A, luminal B, Her+) or histological characteristics (i.e. tumor stages) showed that its expression was positively correlated with an unfavorable outcome (see Fig. 2b–d). In particular, increased BRIP1 transcript levels were found in tumors with an estrogen receptor-negative, progesterone receptor-negative or HER-2-positive status, in basal-like cancers and in stage 2 tumors as compared to stage 1 carcinomas. Together these results indicate that the overexpression of BRIP1 can contribute to breast cancer malignancy.
        The clinical relevance of this gene is further supported by the evidence that mutations in BRIP1 confer an increased risk of breast cancer and transcription of BRIP1 has been found to be cell growth-related and controlled by the E2F/retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway through a conserved E2F-responsive site29.
        Interestingly, among switch genes that have a significant prognostic value in breast cancer we found not only well-characterized protein coding genes (like BRIP1) and the miR-210 whose correlation with breast cancer mortality has been previously reported30, but also a validated pseudogene (LOC148709 or actin gamma 1 pseudogene) not characterized yet.
      
      
        TCGA multi-cancer analysis of switch genes
        The integrated analysis performed on each cancer-specific correlation network built from the large panel of TCGA cancer datasets11 consistently identified cancer-related switch genes that appear to be biologically relevant, as testified by statistically significant enrichment in functional annotation to cancer associated cell processes and gene regulatory networks, such as cell cycle control, development and surveillance of DNA integrity (see Supplementary Table 3). Notably, we found the well-known oncogenic long non-coding RNA PVT13132, the oncogenic miR-182/183/96 cluster, and well-known oncogenic mRNAs (such as BIRC5, MYBL2, FOXM1, PLK1)33343536 as the most common switch genes to the majority of tumors (see Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 9 and Supplementary Fig. 10).
        To compare sets of switch genes between the different TCGA cancer datasets analyzed, we translated results of the multi-cancer integrated network analysis in a binary matrix by assigning 1 if the given gene (matrix row) was found as a switch for the given cancer dataset (matrix column), and 0 otherwise. We then used the Hamming distance to group cancer types based on their degree of switch genes similarity (see Fig. 3a - Right). With the result of this analysis it became possible to point out a cluster of four cancer datasets (i.e. breast invasive carcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, and uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma) sharing a substantial number of switch genes (N = 100, see Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 4), whose biological pathways annotation enrichment analysis revealed significant association to relevant pathways in cancer, generally involved in regulation of cell growth and death (see Fig. 3a - Left). Evidence of switch genes common to different cancer types is a key finding suggesting recurrent patterns of deregulation of cancer gene regulatory networks at the expense of the same regulatory nodes. It is worth to stress that the number of the cancer-recurrent switch genes among the four grouped cancers is not affected by the choice of the correlation thresholds used to build the correlation networks as long as the integrity of the network is preserved (see Supplementary Fig. 11).
        As part of the analysis, the SWIM algorithm also identifies the list of nearest-neighbor genes for each switch node in the given cancer network. Similarly to the multi-cancer atlas of switch genes, we compared lists of nearest-neighbors of switch nodes across the panel of 14 cancer types obtained from TCGA by using Hamming distance to evaluate cancer similarity based on shared nearest-neighbors (Fig. 4 - Left). Interestingly, analysis of their functional annotations (Fig. 4 - Right) highlighted general association of these nearest-neighbors of switch nodes to metabolic processes. Of note, metabolic rewiring is a more and more appreciated mark of tumor transformation37.
      
      
        Cancer-recurrent switch genes impinge upon cell cycle and proliferation
        We sought to analyze the functions of the prevalent set of 100 switch genes identified as recurrent across multiple tumors (namely, breast invasive carcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma and uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma). To this end, we used different sources of gene annotation to map this cancer-recurrent set of switch genes to molecular function and evaluate statistically significant association to specific cellular pathways (see Fig. 5a). This analysis pinpointed several gene regulatory activities in this set such as transcription regulators/co-regulators, chromatin remodeling factors, kinases, and phosphatases. Interestingly, functional enrichment analysis allowed to relate involvement of these switch genes to core cellular pathways such as the cell cycle and the control of DNA integrity orchestrated by TP53.
        Next, we investigated possible co-regulation of this set of switch genes first of all by performing a de novo motif enrichment analysis in their promoter regions by using Homer software38. The results unveiled statistically significant enrichment for three motifs, closely resembling the cell cycle gene homology (CHR) element39, the NF-Y binding motif CCAAT-box40 and the E2F binding motif41 (see Fig. 5b). Remarkably, the gene regulatory network that can be built based on occurrence of these three enriched regulatory motifs in promoter regions shows high coverage (i.e. 30% of the cancer-recurrent switch genes harbor all the three motifs in their promoter regions, 62% two of the three motifs, and 8% only one motif) and suggests extensive co-regulation (Fig. 5c). Interestingly, this high level of interconnection in the network of target genes is in line with the shared commitment of CHR, NF-Y and E2F regulatory elements in the regulation of progression through the cell cycle and its cross-talk with DNA integrity checkpoints39. In turn, this evidence of promoter motif enrichment reinforces the relevance of the finding that switch genes show enriched functional annotation to both these fundamental cellular pathways.
        The results obtained by the de novo motif enrichment analysis were confirmed by Pscan, that evaluates enrichment of known binding motifs in promoter regions, employing the JASPAR 2016 motif collection42. Significant enrichment was found for all NF-Y associated motifs, E2F bound motifs (E2F1/E2F4/E2F6), CHR (JASPAR 2016 motif LIN56), together with other GC rich binding sites (NRF1, SP1/SP2). To confirm these results, we submitted the 100 cancer-recurrent switch genes to Cscan43, a tool that, starting from a large collection of ChIP-Seq experiments, performs an enrichment analysis for the transcription factors bound to the promoters of a set of input genes. We found that, among factors of the E2F family, E2F4 can be considered to be bound in vivo to virtually all the promoters, whereas NF-Y is bound to about 70–90% of the promoters according to the cell lines. Lower but nevertheless significant association was found also for SP1 and SP2. In other words, the regulatory associations that could be inferred from the motif analysis were largely confirmed by in vivo experimental data, on cancer cell lines as well.
        By focusing on the GM12878, K562, and HeLaS3 cell lines (for which binding data for both E2F4 and NF-Y are available), we also found a significant enrichment for binding of FOS, CHD2 and RFX5, despite the fact that their motifs were not over-represented in the promoter analysis. Indeed, a recent work focused on regulatory modules containing NF-Y showed for all these latter factors a significant genome-wide co-association in DNA binding with NF-Y44. More importantly, they lack their canonical binding site when found bound to DNA in the same regions of NF-Y, where the tethering motif on DNA seems to be made of two consecutive CCAAT-box sites (bound by NF-Y) with a precise spacing. Significant genome wide co-association with NF-Y was also reported in the same study for E2F4, SP1, and SP2.
        We thus investigated whether the double-CCAAT box module could be present in the promoters of the cancer-recurrent switch genes by using PscanChip45 on peaks for NF-YB in the K562 cell line. We indeed found that this module is contained in about half of the promoters. Moreover, a significant enrichment for E2F motifs could be found as well, situated outside the NF-Y bound regions (i.e. the double-CCAAT box module), suggesting no overlap, but rather a side-by-side arrangement in binding between the two transcription factors (see Supplementary Fig. 12).
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Cancer is a leading cause of disease worldwide. In 2012 there were an estimated 14.1 million new cases of cancer in the world46. It means that every two seconds someone in the world is diagnosed with cancer and this number is expected to further increase in the coming decades. From a global perspective, focusing on cancer studies is therefore strongly justified for what concern both the prevention activities and the development of computational models that could support clinicians towards targeted interventions. Moreover, in cancer studies, the identification of a specific group of genes whose expression is related to a specific tumor or patient survival - that in clinical context are often referred to as clinical biomarkers - is a crucial step toward understanding the underlying molecular mechanisms and identifying novel therapeutic targets.
      Taking advantage from the vast human cancer data available from TCGA11, we used SWIM to unveil switch genes in several human cancers (see Supplementary Table 1) as a new approach to prioritise clinically relevant genes that deserve further investigation as putative clinical biomarkers. Importantly, we found that the switch genes shared by different cancer types are all up-regulated in tumor tissues and primarily involved in the regulation of cell cycle, which is a fundamental and tightly controlled process under physiological circumstances. However, the criticality of this process becomes even more apparent from endless evidence of its alteration in pathological conditions related to uncontrolled cell growth, with tumor transformation being the most notable example. One central mechanism regulating progression through the cell cycle is phosphorylation operated by complexes of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and their corresponding cyclins. An example of this regulatory paradigm is provided by the cyclin B1 (CCNB1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) pair that controls the checkpoint between G2 phase and mitosis (M). Of note, we found both CDK1 and CCNB1 in the list of switch genes shared by different cancer types. Interestingly, the motif analysis of promoter regions conducted over this list of cancer-recurrent switch genes evidenced the presence of a neat enrichment of three DNA motifs all related to regulation of cell cycle: the CHR element, and the NF-Y and E2F binding motifs. In particular, E2F4 appeared as the best candidate of the E2F family to bind the E2F motif, since it has been found to be bound in vivo to virtually all the promoters.
      NF-Y is known to associate with and positively regulate transcription at CCAAT motifs in the promoters of cell cycle-regulatory genes4447. A recent bioinformatics analysis showed a remarkable abundance of CCAAT boxes in promoters regulated during the G2/M phase48 and a recent computational algorithm, developed to unveil transcription factors that preferentially act together, identified the NF-Y/CHR module as predictive of G2/M genes49. In addition, a comprehensive effort to identify genome-wide regulatory modules resulting from the co-association of NF-Y with other transcription factors has been carried out by the authors in ref. 44 through the integration of hundreds of ENCODE ChIP-Seq experiments in three different cell lines. The results of the analysis show that, among the others, E2F4 and NF-Y are constitutively expressed factors and NF-Y is often required for E2F4 efficient promoter association.
      Many studies that over the last years focused on the role of NF-Y in controlling cell proliferation475051525354 converge on these main results: (i) NF-Y controls the expression of several key regulators of the cell cycle; (ii) NF-Y silencing impairs G2/M progression and induces apoptosis; (iii) widespread activation of G2/M and anti-apoptotic genes requires NF-Y; (iv) NF-Y and mutant p53 physically interact up-regulating the expression of many cell cycle related genes in response to DNA damage; (v) NF-Y over-expression increases the proliferation of cancer cells harboring endogenous mutant p53. Moreover, several clinical studies have indicated that patients with up-regulated expression of NF-Y target genes have poor prognosis in multiple cancers, including breast and lung555657.
      Regarding E2F4, even though it was previously known as a repressor of cell proliferation, some studies introduced the possibility that E2F4 may function as an activator of genes implicated in positive regulation of the cell cycle, among them MYBL258. In addition, E2F4 over-expression in transgenic mice leads to the development of tumors and mutated E2F4 has been reported in various human tumors, providing evidence for the oncogenic activity of E2F4596061. Finally, CHR element is not only necessary for the repression of gene transcription in G0/G1, but also for the activation of cell cycle genes during G2 and M phases, by a direct binding with MYBL2 (B-MYB) and FOXM3962, two pro-oncogenic genes that we have found in the list of cancer-recurrent switch genes.
      Taken together these results suggest a model wherein NF-Y, in collaboration with E2F4 and/or MYBL2 and FOXM1 complexes, binds to and activates transcription of E2F/NF-Y/CHR dependent switch genes accelerating late phase of cell cycle with a consequent increase of cancer progression and rewiring of some metabolic pathways, hallmarks of the malignant transformation (Fig. 6).
      In conclusion, although our study can be considered as a starting point, and further functional and clinical investigations are needed, the switch gene signatures and their nearest-neighbor genes can improve our knowledge of the cellular events that are crucial for carcinogenesis and they also reveal many potential prognostic and novel therapeutic targets that have so far not been linked to cancers. These findings put the spotlights on the importance of having a tool like SWIM that is amenable to automatically detect switch genes (i.e. without the intervention of a domain expert) in biologically relevant scenarios, including but not limited to human cancer. SWIM could allow clinicians and molecular biologists to avoid a waste of time and money focusing their efforts only on a small pool of genes.
    
    
      Methods
      
        SWIM software
        The integrated network analysis developed to identify switch genes in TCGA human cancer dataset was implemented by the software SWIM, a user-friendly, wizard-like, Graphical User Interphase (GUI) developed in MATLAB®. A fully comprehensive description of the operating principles of SWIM is provided in Supplementary File 1.
      
      
        Tumor expression data
        Collections of tumor expression data from high-throughput RNA- and miRNA-sequencing were downloaded from the TCGA data portal on 6 December 2014. High-throughput RNA-sequencing data correspond to level 3 data (i.e. normalized expression data) from RNASeq Version 2 created by using MapSplice to do the alignment and RSEM to perform the quantification and normalization. MiRNA-sequencing data correspond to level 3 data (i.e. normalized expression data) created by using RPKM procedure to perform the normalization. Additional details on the downloaded samples such as dataset release and platform type are provided in Supplementary Table 5. Only cancer datasets including at least 7 patients with tumor and matched-normal samples (i.e. the matched-normal tissue is defined as the tissue that is adjacent to the tumor and taken from the same patient) for both RNA- and miRNA-sequencing experiments were retained for subsequent analysis. This data selection left a total of 2108 samples relative to 14 tumor types (namely, brca, kirc, thca, prad, lihc, hnsc, lusc, kich, kirp, blca, luad, chol, ucec and coad) and accounting for 540 unique cancer patients. Clinical metadata for the same patients were also retrieved through the TCGA.
      
      
        Data annotation and functional enrichment analysis
        Gene features included in the RNA-sequencing cancer datasets were annotated to molecular biotype (e.g. protein coding, non-coding RNA) by using the human gene annotation available from Ensembl (release GRCh38). Moreover, genes were mapped to selected gene categories (e.g. transcription factor, chromatin remodeling factor), cellular pathways and regulatory interactions (such as transcription factor targeting predictions) by using several gene annotation sources636465. Fisher’s exact test has been used to analyze associations between selected gene subsets (e.g. switch, non-switch) and functional annotation terms such as gene ontology (GO) terms63 and KEGG pathways64, or between selected gene subsets and the occurrence of specific regulatory motifs, such as transcription factor binding sites, in promoter regions. Motif enrichment analysis in promoter regions was performed by using the Homer software38. Promoter regions used in this analysis were identified as genomic regions spanning intervals from −500 to +50 nucleotides with respect to transcription start sites. A p-value 0.05, after adjustment for multiple testing performed with the Benjamini-Hochberg method, was set as the significance threshold to identify enriched functional annotations and regulatory motifs among selected gene lists. In order to confirm the results obtained with Homer software we used the Pscan tool42 to analyze the promoter regions (from −450 to +50 with respect to the transcription starting site) of the RefSeq transcripts associated with the cancer-recurrent switch genes.
        Moreover, we performed an analysis on the same promoter set of the cancer-recurrent switch genes with the Cscan tool43. Starting from a large collection of ChIP-Seq experiments for transcription factors (including the whole ENCODE dataset), Cscan determines for each input promoter which ChIP-Seq peaks can be found associated with it. Then, it computes for each ChIP-Seq experiment considered the significance of its enrichment in the input promoter set, according to how many promoters of the set contain a peak for the experiment, with respect to the fraction of annotated genes in the genome with a peak for the experiment in the promoter.
        In order to investigate whether double-CCAAT box module could be present on the promoter set of the cancer-recurrent switch genes, we performed a sequence analysis of the ChIP-Seq peak regions for both NF-Y (peaks of the ChIP-Seq for NF-YB) and E2F4 that could be found in the promoter regions in the K562 cell line using PscanChIP45. PscanChIP is a motif analysis tool that, starting from a collection of genomic regions derived from a ChIP-Seq experiment, scans them using motif descriptors like JASPAR or TRANSFAC position-specific frequency matrices, or descriptors uploaded by users, and it evaluates both motif enrichment and positional bias within the regions according to different measures and criteria. PscanChIP can successfully identify not only the actual binding sites for the TF investigated by a ChIP-Seq experiment but also secondary motifs corresponding to other TFs that tend to bind the same regions, and, if present, precise positional correlations among their respective sites45.
      
      
        Kaplan-Meier
        To analyze the prognostic value of each switch gene in the TCGA dataset of breast invasive carcinoma, the patient samples are split into two groups (called low-expression and high-expression group) according to the upper and lower quartile expressions of the proposed biomarker switch gene. In particular, low- and high-expression groups refer to patients with expression levels of the given switch gene lower than the 25th and greater than the 75th percentile, respectively. For each patient cohort, the cumulative survival rates are computed for each switch gene according to the Kaplan-Meier method66 on the clinical metadata provided by TCGA. A log-rank test was performed to assess the p-value and to signify that the lower the p-value, the better the separation between the two prognosis groups. Finally, the switch genes are sorted by increasing p-values in order to identify the best at separating the two prognosis groups (see Supplementary Table 2).
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Paci, P. et al. SWIM: a computational tool to unveiling crucial nodes in complex biological networks. Sci. Rep.
7, 44797; doi: 10.1038/srep44797 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Files
        
        
      
    
  
        Identification of the associations between microRNA molecules and human diseases from large-scale heterogeneous biological data is an important step for understanding the pathogenesis of diseases in microRNA level. However, experimental verification of microRNA-disease associations is expensive and time-consuming. To overcome the drawbacks of conventional experimental methods, we presented a combinatorial prioritization algorithm to predict the microRNA-disease associations. Importantly, our method can be used to predict microRNAs (diseases) associated with the diseases (microRNAs) without the known associated microRNAs (diseases). The predictive performance of our proposed approach was evaluated and verified by the internal cross-validations and external independent validations based on standard association datasets. The results demonstrate that our proposed method achieves the impressive performance for predicting the microRNA-disease association with the Area Under receiver operation characteristic Curve (AUC), 86.93%, which is indeed outperform the previous prediction methods. Particularly, we observed that the ensemble-based method by integrating the predictions of multiple algorithms can give more reliable and robust prediction than the single algorithm, with the AUC score improved to 92.26%. We applied our combinatorial prioritization algorithm to lung neoplasms and breast neoplasms, and revealed their top 30 microRNA candidates, which are in consistent with the published literatures and databases.
      
    In biomedical research, unraveling the genome elements associated with the human diseases is still an important step for understanding the pathological mechanisms of diseases. In recent decades, plentiful achievements powered by the advanced next generation genome sequencing technologies have been made towards this objective123. Meanwhile, a variety of computational approaches have been proposed to predict the disease-related protein-coding genes using large-scale heterogeneous biological datasets456789. For example, Kohler et al. and Franke et al. separately established a functional linkage network (FLN) from heterogeneous data sources, and utilized the FLN for prioritizing the genes related with various human diseases45. The successful identification of the disease-associated genes provides testable hypotheses for further experimental research, and therefore can effectively promote the understanding of pathogenesis of diseases.
    MicroRNA genes are a special class of non-coding genes producing short non-coding microRNA molecules of ~22 nucleotides, which exert their functions mainly by suppressing the expression of target mRNAs at the post-transcriptional level10. In the past few years, many thousands of microRNA molecules have been discovered in various eukaryotic organisms by the experimental and computational methods1112. MicroRNA recognizes their mRNAs by binding to the 3′ UTR regions of targets with imperfect complementary base pairing and thus causing target mRNAs cleavage or translation inhibition13. Plentiful study evidences have been exhibited that multiple microRNA molecules simultaneously bind to the same mRNAs, one microRNAs can also exert impacts on multiple target mRNA molecules and thus involve in a complex post-transcriptional regulatory network which plays the important roles in various important biological processes141516. Since microRNA molecules participate in many crucial biological processes; it has been attracted more and more attentions1718192021, a great number of microRNA-related works have been accomplished222324252627. Interestingly, it has also been observed that the microRNA-mediated post-transcription regulations are often highly conserved during the evolution2829. Furthermore, the accumulating biological studies have been showed that dysregulation of microRNAs are often related to the initiation, development and progression of complex diseases; especially; they are frequently involved in the human cancers3031323334. Therefore, the system-level searching for the authentic associations between microRNAs and human diseases is an important topic of molecular oncology and biomedical research.
    Although various biological experiments have been become available nowadays, experimental validation of disease-related microRNAs still remains challenging and expensive353637. In silico computational methods for predicting the microRNA-disease associations are an alternative method to help selecting most reliable candidates for experimental validation. Nowadays, abundant microRNAs-disease association data has been generated rapidly during the studies of biomedicine and molecular biology. Jiang et al. and Lu et al. independently developed two publically available databases of miR2Disease and Human MicroRNA Disease Database (HMDD) based on the experimentally validated associations from the literatures3839. Subsequently, Wang et al. constructed a manually collected mammalian non-coding RNA(ncRNA)-disease relationships (MNDR) database40 to provide a repository for exploring the functional roles of the ncRNAs in mammals. In addition, another publicly available database of Differentially Expressed MicroRNAs in human Cancers (dbDEMC) has been also built based on statistical analysis, which aim to provide the potential cancer-related microRNAs41. These datasets provided a solid basis for developing appropriate computational tools to uncover the complex links between microRNAs and diseases in a large scale.
    Recently, Zou et al. reviewed and summarized the existing computational approaches for disease-related microRNAs prediction4243. Among these, the machine-learning- based models and similarity-measure-based models are two main representatives. In the field of machine learning, several methods have been proposed to identify the disease-associated microRNAs. For example, the lasso regression model of protein- protein interaction were employed to discover the associations between microRNAs and diseases44. Jiang et al. designed a disease-associated microRNAs classifier by integrating the different genomic data source into a framework of Naïve Bayes model45. In addition to this model, Jiang et al. also used the classical Support Vector Machine (SVM) learning to distinguish the positive microRNA-disease associations from the negative ones46. Xu et al. proposed a machine learning method to prioritize the disease-related microRNAs by the topological features of the microRNA target- dysregulated network47. Zeng et al. employed two multi-path mathematical models to predict microRNA-disease associations using heterogeneous biological networks4849. However, all these machine learning methods require the experimentally verified non-association information between the microRNAs and the diseases, which are quite difficult and even impossible to obtain. To overcome this existing limitation, Chen et al. proposed a semi-supervised learning method called Regularized Least Squares for microRNA-Disease Associations (RLSMDA) to uncover the associations between microRNAs and diseases50.
    The similarity measure-based methods were proposed based on the observation that functionally related microRNA molecules tend to be associated with phenotypically similar diseases. For example, Zhang et al. first developed a statistical method to identify the cardiovascular disease associated microRNAs using the disease-related genes, Gene Ontology, microRNAs cluster and family analysis51. Li et al. predicted the microRNAs related to a specific disease by calculating the functional consistency score (FCS) among their targets and the known targets associated with the disease52. Jiang et al. proposed two computational methods by integrating different biological networks for prioritizing the disease related microRNAs and predicting the potential associations between microRNAs and diseases5354. Chen et al. implemented the random walk algorithm on microRNA functional similarity network and developed the Random Walk with Restart for MicroRNA-Disease Association (RWRMDA) to predict the associations between microRNAs and diseases55. Xuan et al. developed the weighted K-most similar neighbors (HDMP) to infer the microRNAs associated with human diseases based on the microRNA functional similarity network derived from the disease semantic and phenotypic similarity, microRNA family and cluster data56. However, all these methods have the different inherent weaknesses. Firstly, some methods require microRNA targets and known genes related to disease which might be incomplete or inaccurate (such as the Jiang’s method). Secondly, the local similarity search strategy has adopted in several models, which only considered the node neighbor information for scoring the potential associations (such as the HDMP method). Thirdly, some prediction tools cannot be applied to discover the microRNAs related to the diseases without the known related microRNAs (such as the RWRMDA method). Considering the weaknesses in previous methods, Chen et al. proposed two global similarity search methods include the within and between score for predicting microRNA-disease association (WBSMDA) and the heterogeneous graph inference to recover the potential microRNA-disease associations (HGIMDA)5758. Chen et al. also developed a mathematic model for predicting the different types of associations between microRNAs and diseases using the Restricted Boltzmann Machine59. Based on the standpoint of global network consistency, Chen et al. presented the network- consistency-based inference (NetCBI) for targeting the true microRNA-disease links60. Gu et al. further developed the network consistency projection for mining the links between microRNAs and diseases (NCPMDA). This method integrated microRNA similarity, microRNA family, disease similarity and microRNA-disease associations in a system level for scoring the probability of a microRNA and a disease was related61. In addition, some other tools have also been designed for uncovering the potential microRNA-disease associations62636465666768. While these proposed methods can effectively facilitate for future researches of the microRNAs involved in the pathogenesis of diseases, their performance has not been quite perfect.
    In this study, we designed a combinatorial prioritization algorithm to infer the novel associations between microRNAs and diseases by modifying the existing maximizing information flow method, which was primarily designed for the disease-associated protein-coding gene prioritization. Importantly, this method can be applied to infer the novel microRNAs (diseases) for diseases (microRNAs) without the known related microRNAs (diseases). Validation experiments and case studies demonstrate that our method has the superior ability for predicting the novel links between microRNAs and diseases. Particularly, we observe that an ensemble-based predictor by combining the predictions of multiple inference methods can enhance the performance to a great extent. Our methods can uncover the accurate microRNA-disease associations and thus provide useful resources for identifying the novel links between microRNAs and diseases.
    
      Results
      
        Performance evaluation
        To effectively evaluate the capability of combinatorial prioritization algorithm for inferring the potential microRNA-disease associations, we performed the parameter optimization process by grid search using leave-one-out cross-validation carried out on the known experimentally verified microRNA-disease associations (see Materials and Methods). In this process, all the remaining associations between microRNAs and diseases after removing the query microRNA (disease) associated disease (microRNA) were used as a training set to construct the network flow model. In the grid search process, we set the α from 0.1 to 0.7 with step 0.1, β from 0.1 to 0.7 with step 0.1, γ equals 1, 10, 100, 1000 and 10000 respectively, η from 1 to 10 with step 1, σ from 1 to 10 with step 1. After a comprehensive searching, the parameters (α = 0.1, β = 0.6, γ = 100, η = 6, σ = 10 for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases in the leave-one-out cross-validation; α = 0.5, β = 0.1, γ = 1, η = 1, σ = 10 for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases in the ab initio cross-validation; α = 0.5, β = 0.7, γ = 1, η = 1, σ = 4 for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs in the leave-one-out cross-validation and α = 0.6, β = 0.3, γ = 1, η = 1, σ = 4 for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs in the ab initio cross-validation) lead to best Area Under Curve (AUC) score of Receiver Operation Characteristic (ROC) curve were selected for further performance evaluation and comparison.
        After obtaining the optimized parameters, we performed a series of leave-one-out cross-validation experiments to evaluate the capacity of our proposed approach for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases (microRNA prioritization). The results are presented in Fig. 1A and Table 1, in which we can observe that our method is highly effective in uncovering the known microRNAs associated with the given query diseases. For instance, in the validation experiment using 300 randomly selected microRNAs as candidate microRNAs, the AUC score is as high as 86.76%. Meanwhile, it can be also observed that the performances obtained using our model is quite robust to the number of randomly selected candidate microRNAs. It is possible that the multiple associations between a microRNA and all its related diseases facilitate the inferring of novel diseases that are related to the microRNA. To demonstrate that our flow model is applicable to the diseases without the known related microRNAs, we conducted a series of ab initio cross-validation experiments by deleting the all links between the query diseases and their related microRNAs. When our model was tested using 300 randomly selected microRNAs as the candidate microRNAs, the highest AUC score, 71.30%, was obtained (Table 1), suggesting that our model is a powerful tool to achieve the goal of predicting the microRNA-disease associations for the diseases without the any known associated microRNAs.
        To assess the ability of our method for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs (disease prioritization), we further carried out a series of leave-one-out cross-validations and ab initio cross-validations using the randomly selected diseases as candidate diseases. The results are showed in Fig. 1B and Table 1, from which we can see the effectiveness and robustness of our method in predicting diseases that are associated with a query microRNA. For example, in the validation experiment using 130 randomly selected diseases as candidate diseases, we obtain the AUC scores of 81.52% and 79.63% in leave-one-out cross-validation and ab initio cross-validation, respectively. These results above suggest that our proposed method can successfully place the diseases that are truly related to the query microRNA at the top of all the candidate diseases. We have also investigated the effects of microRNA functional similarity measurements on the model’s inference capability. We built a new network flow model using another microRNA functional similarity network, which is derived from the microRNA’s target gene similarities. Using 20 different ratios of all inferred microRNA-disease links as prediction results, the paired single tail t-test for the AUC score comparison was carried out. The result shows that the microRNA functional similarity derived from disease phenotypic and semantic similarity are better for improving the inference capability of our method than which derived from their target similarity (p-value = 2.61E-2 for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases, p-value = 1.74E-2 for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs).
        After confirming the usefulness of our method using the internal leave-one-out and ab initio cross-validations, we adopted the external independent validation to further assess the generalization ability of the models. In this experiment, the flow threshold which achieves the highest F1 score of 0.78 in the leave-one-out cross-validation was employed to make the predictions. The two network flow models for microRNA and disease prioritizations were applied to predict the unknown associations between all possible microRNAs and diseases. The results demonstrate that among 2163 and 724 associations between microRNAs and diseases predicted by these two models, 370 and 65 associations are now annotated in at least one of three databases of HMDD, miR2Disease and dbDEMC. The hypergeometric test was employed to calculate the probability of the chanciness of the obtained predictions. The extremely significant p-values of 2.18E-23 and 4.93E-135 are obtained, respectively. These results further revealed that our model has the strong potential to infer the novel microRNA-disease associations.
        We substituted an undirected link between microRNA and disease with two directed links in the opposite orientation to allow for information pass in both directions when constructing the microRNAome-phenome network. It is possible that all connections between the microRNAome and the phenome flowing from diseases (microRNAs) to microRNAs (diseases) but not in the opposite direction could effectively improve the inference ability of the models. To study this, we removed all links from microRNAs to diseases (all links from diseases to microRNAs) in the microRNAome-phenome network and repeated the leave-one-out cross-validation for microRNA prioritization (disease prioritization). The results show that the AUC scores are 88.82% and 81.85% in identifying the microRNAs related to the specific diseases and in identifying the diseases related to the specific microRNAs, respectively. Compared with the previous analysis, where the connections pointing from both diseases to microRNAs and microRNAs to diseases (AUC scores equal 86.93% and 83.50%, respectively), we can only observe the relative slight fluctuation in the performances. Based on this, we conclude that the predictive performance of our proposed method is robust to the building method of the microRNAome-phenome network.
        To further verify the superior predictive performance of our method is indeed owing to the biological connectivity information of microRNAome-phenome network, we conducted the permutation experiment by the following three steps i) permuting the associations between diseases and microRNAs while making the whole number of links between diseases and microRNAs unchangeable, ii) permuting the similarities in microRNAome while making the number of links of the microRNAome network unchangeable and iii) permuting the similarities in the phenome while making the number of links of the phenome network unchangeable. We repeated leave-one-out cross-validations 100 times using the permutated networks. The AUC scores are all around 50% (Fig. 1). Additionally, we also examined our model considering only the single aspect permutation including 1) without the microRNA similarity information, 2) without the disease similarity information and 3) without the associations between microRNAs and diseases. In the first case, the AUC scores from 86.93% drop down to 80.31% and from 83.50% decrease to 78.26% for the microRNA prioritization and disease prioritization, respectively. In the second case, we observe that the AUC scores from 86.93% reduce to 82.57% and from 83.50% go down to 77.34% for the microRNA prioritization and disease prioritization, respectively. If we remove the links between microRNAs and diseases, the performance is dramatically reduced, with the AUC scores pulled down to 71.58% and 70.41% in microRNA prioritization and disease prioritization, respectively. All these results suggest that the authentic biology relationships contained in the microRNAome-phenome network contribute to the successful prediction of microRNA-disease associations.
      
      
        Effects of parameters
        In the process of constructing the flow models, five parameters affected the inference ability of our proposed approach. The parameter α (Alpha, ranging from 0 to 1) was used to decide the minimum functional similarity between two microRNAs and controlled the information quantity that can send from one microRNA to one another. The parameter β (Beta, ranging from 0 to 1) decided the minimum semantic and phenotypic similarity between two diseases. Therefore, it can affect the information quantity that can send from one disease to one another. The parameters γ (Gamma), η (Eta) and σ (Sigma) changing from 0 to the positive infinity, determined the capacity of the link going from the phenome (microRNAome) to the microRNAome (phenome) and controlled the information flow quantity that can be imported from the phenome to the microRNAome or vice versa. It was obviously not possible to enumerate all possible combinations of these five parameters. To effectively optimize the selection of the five parameters for advancing the predictive performance of our model, we analyzed each parameter individually while making the other parameters unchangeable in the framework of leave-one-out cross-validation.
        By analyzing the distribution of functional similarity between microRNAs (diseases), we observed that the density of the similarity values appeared an obvious deflection point, indicating that most of the similarity values tend to be small (Fig. S1). We thus concluded that the parameters α and β should not be set too low to filter out the noise contained in microRNAome-phenome network. Based on this, we carried out a grid search process on these two parameters (α and β from 0.1007 to 0.8 with step 0.0007). The results are presented in Fig. S2. When the value of parameter α is set in a certain range, the AUC scores remain relatively stable. However, the predictive performance displays a significant drop down while the value of α exceed a given range. This is because that the biologically important connectivity information is not captured by our model when the parameters α be set too high, while too low value of α lead to the increase of noises included in the microRNA functional similarity network. These outcomes suggest the relatively small affecting of parameter β on the predictive performance of our proposed method. This is closely related to the vast majority of biological connectivity information is absorbed by our model when the parameter β change from 0.1007 to 0.8, since the most similarity scores of disease similarity network are lower than 0.1. These outcomes reveal that accurate similarity information is very important for effective detecting the potential microRNA-disease associations.
        To study the effects of parameters γ, η and σ, we performed a grid search on different values of γ from 0.002 to 1 with the step 0.002 and from 2 to 501 with the step 1, η from 1.009 to 10 with the step 0.009 and σ from 1.009 to 10 with the step 0.009. As shown in Fig. S2, the AUC scores have a small change when the value of γ be set in a certain range, but the AUC scores fluctuate sharply while the value of γ is too high or too low. This is owing to 1) the similarity information in the microRNAome (phenome) will not be able to flow into the phenome (microRNAome) effectively if the value of γ be set too low; 2) the microRNA families and clusters information is not taken into account when the value of γ be set too high. On the contrary, our proposed method is quite steady in terms of the parameters of η and δ (Fig. S2). For example, when different parameter values η and σ are adopted in microRNAs prioritization, the AUC scores only change within 0.34% and 0.38% intervals in leave-one-out cross-validation, respectively. Similarly, the AUC scores fluctuate within 0.93% and 1.27% interval in diseases prioritization, respectively. These observations indicate that the parameter γ has a relatively large effect on the performance of our proposed model, while parameters η and σ can be given in an extensive range without affecting the performance of our method in a large extent.
      
      
        Performance comparison
        Recently, a large number of computational tools have been proposed for the potential microRNA-disease association prediction. According to the published literatures, six methods including Jiang’s method53, HDMP56, RWRMDA55, Net-CBI60, RLSMDA50 and NCPMDA61 have been proposed as classical or state-of-the-art computational models. Since it has been shown that the performance of Net-CBI is obvious worse than RWRMDA5060, we thus did not compare it with our method. We employed the leave-one-out cross-validation experiments for evaluating their ability for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases based on the common gold standard association dataset as adopted in our study, and compared their performance with our proposed method using both the ROC curve and the Precision-Recall (PR) curve. Especially, the differences of inference capability of these algorithms were further analyzed by paired t-test. The paired t-test was performed by comparing the numeric vector of AUC scores obtained on 20 different proportions ranked lists of all inferred associations between microRNAs and diseases.
        Firstly, the ROC curve was employed to evaluate the performance of these in silico models. As shown in Fig. 2A, the ROC curve of our method (MaxFlow) lies clearly above those of Jiang’s method, RWRMDA, RLSMDA and NCPMDA. For Jiang’s method, the AUC score and the corresponding p-value are 66.48% and 3.61E-09, respectively. As shown in the manuscript of Jiang et al., this method uses the local similarity search and depend on the predicted targets of microRNAs, which results in a high false-positive and false-negative ratio. Other restrictions lie in the building of microRNA functional similarity network and using the simple Boolean phenotypical similarity between diseases (this method adopted only the information whether or not two microRNAs or diseases are similar, rather than their similarity scores). When the performance of our proposed method was compared with RWRMDA (the restart probability r of RWRMDA is set to 0.9 given by the experiments in the literature55), the AUC scores 72.82% for RWRMDA (p-value = 2.97E-07). This outcome is closely related to that this method predicts the microRNAs associated with a given disease by random walk only on the microRNA functional similarity network. The RLSMDA method (default parameters provided in the literature) achieves the AUC score of 84.49%, which is lower than our method (p-value = 3.82E-03). The NCPMDA method (default parameters provided in the literature) obtains an AUC score of 81.86%, which is also indeed smaller than our method (p-value = 2.84E-03). To compare with HDMP method, we set the number of most similar neighbors K = 20 which achieves the highest prediction performance in the author study. We did not find that the significant difference between our method and HDMP method (AUC score of ROC curve for HDMP = 87.81%, p-value = 0.36). However, the similarity network was not adopted in the HDMP method, which lead to it cannot be work for the isolate diseases without the known associated microRNAs. Our method can make prediction for the diseases without the known related microRNAs, which can overcome the key limitation of HDMP method.
        Secondly, the performances of these methods were further assessed by the PR curve. It is clearly demonstrated that the PR curve of our method lies above those of Jiang’s method, RWRMDA, RLSMDA and NCPMDA in Fig. 2B. When comparing the AUC score of our method with Jiang’s method, RWRMDA, RLSMDA and NCPMDA, we can observe the apparent difference, with the p-values of 3.51E-10, 2.83E-8, 1.84E-5 and 3.61E-8. Similarly, we did not find that obvious difference between our method and HDMP (AUC score of PR curve for our method = 40.21%, AUC score of PR curve for HDMP = 39.09%, p-value = 0.43).
        In addition to comparing the performance of our method with the pervious methods for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the given diseases, we further carried out the leave-one-out cross-validation experiments to evaluate the predictive performance of these methods for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs. We did not compare them with our method because that the Jiang’s method, HDMP and RWRMDA were designed for prioritizing the microRNAs associated with the specific diseases;. The ROC curves and PR curves of our method, RLSMDA and NCPMDA are presented in Fig. 3. For the ROC curves, we have not found the obvious difference among these methods, with the AUC score of 83.50%, 83.69% and 83.57% for our algorithm, RLSMDA and NCPMDA, respectively. The p-values are 0.82 and 0.69 in comparing our method with RLSMDA and NCPMDA, respectively. However, in terms of the PR curve, the predictive capability of our algorithm is indeed outperform RLSMDA and NCPMDA. The AUC scores are 57.21%, 31.91% and 29.82% for our algorithm, RLSMDA and NCPMDA, respectively. And the corresponding p-values are 3.57E-05 and 2.11E-05 in comparing our method with RLSMDA and NCPMDA, respectively.
        RLSMDA and NCPMDA were implemented on the disease similarity network and microRNA similarity network simultaneously to predict the associations between microRNAs and diseases. These two methods used the similar data structure as our method. For the more fair and reasonable comparison, we implemented them on our miRNAome-phenome network for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the specific diseases and for prioritizing the diseases associated with the specific microRNAs. We performed the leave-one-out cross-validation experiments to evaluate the predictive performance of them. Interestingly, in the ROC curves (Fig. S3), we found that the AUC scores of RLSMDA and NCPMDA are improved to 86.21% and 86.70% for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the given diseases, and increased to 84.62% and 84.07% for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs. While the AUC scores of these two methods have the certain rises, we did not observe that the significant differences between our method and them. When the performances were compared with the PR curve, we observed that the AUC scores of RLSMDA and NCPMDA are raised to 35.43% and 39.04% for prioritizing the microRNAs related to the given diseases, and ascended to 35.22% and 31.61% for prioritizing the diseases related to the specific microRNAs. However, the differences of predictive performance between our method and them are still apparent (see Fig. S3). These results suggest the network information flow model has the substantial contribution for improving the inference capability of a predictor.
        We observed that the outcomes change largely from different inference models. The associations between microRNAs and diseases are correctly discerned in some models while indistinguishable in other methods. This indicated that each algorithm has its own strengths and weaknesses; no single algorithm can perform optimally across all datasets and performance measurements. Therefore, it is useful to build an ensemble predictor by aggregating the different computational methods. Here we adopted two ensemble methods, include weighted rank average and not weighted rank average69, to integrate the predictions of six algorithms mentioned above. The weight value of each method was given based on their AUC scores. In the ROC curves, the ensemble models get the AUC scores 92.26% and 91.21% for weighted rank average and not weighted rank average, which are outperformed the individual methods (Fig. S4). Moreover, we observe that the weighted rank average can obtain better performance than the not weighted rank average (p-value = 1.27E-2 for AUC scores of ROC curve, p-value = 2.46E-2 for AUC scores of PR curve). These results show that the ensemble-based method can improve the accuracy and robustness of a predictor.
      
      
        Case Studies
        Previous studies have been shown that the microRNAs are located in neoplasms- associated genomic regions or brittle sites and are associated with the development of various cancers707172. For instance, mir-215 and mir-301 are downregulated in colon cancer, and mir-129 is overexpressed in prostate cancer. Therefore, we adopted the combinatorial prioritization algorithm to identify both breast neoplasms and lung neoplasms related microRNAs. The obtained prediction results were validated by the newly reported microRNAs in HMDD database, miR2Disease database, dbDEMC database and published literatures. For simplicity, the top 30 microRNA candidates for these two cancers were selected here to illustrate our model’s application of predicting the potential disease-associated microRNAs (The detailed descriptions of the microRNA candidates of breast neoplasms and lung neoplasms were presented in the Table S1 and Table S2).
        For breast neoplasms, there are 79 microRNA candidates which the rank ratio higher than the given threshold (0.78) derived from maximizing the F1-measure. The top 30 microRNA candidates and evidences for their association are illustrated in Table 2. 15 of them are identified to be related to breast neoplasms by the recently recorded microRNAs in HMDD database. 8 microRNAs are reported by the miR2disease database. The dbDEMC database includes 27 microRNAs which are up-regulated or down-regulated in breast cancer (malignant breast neoplasms). Two microRNAs are supported to have dysregulation in breast cancer by literatures7374. Although we have not found any evidences in the databases and the literatures for hsa-mir-449b, 7 of top 50 predicted target genes of this microRNA are the breast cancer-associated genes, according to the G2SBC, a breast cancer database for genes to systems75. This indicates that hsa-mir-449b is likely to participate in the biological processes related to breast cancer. These results demonstrate that our method can discover the key breast neoplasms-related microRNAs.
        82 microRNA candidates for lung neoplasms have the rank ratio larger than the given threshold of 0.78. Among the top 30 microRNA candidates, 11 microRNAs are sustained by the recently recorded microRNAs of HMDD database; 6 microRNAs are included in miR2Disease database; 23 microRNAs are contained in the dbDEMC database. Additionally, several published literatures also confirmed 3 microRNAs are significantly dysregulation in lung neoplasms767778. Interestingly, we predicted a novel human lung cancer-related microRNA, has-mir-130a, which was reported in mouse and collected in the MNDR database79. For the remaining hsa-mir-208b, its target genes are related to the pathological processes of lung neoplasms80. These results well reveal that the top 30 microRNAs are the potential candidates associated with lung neoplasms.
        Based on the results of case studies above, we performed the statistical analysis with the aim to further confirm the rationality and reliability of our method. Firstly, we selected and compared two groups of microRNA functional similarity datasets. The group one is comprised of the list of average similarity between each known cancer- related microRNA and all predicted cancer-related microRNAs. The group two is made up of the list of mean similarity between each known cancer-related microRNA and all other unrelated microRNAs. The extremely significant p-values of 6.22E-69 and 3.64E-12 are obtained for breast neoplasms and lung neoplasms by unpaired t-test, indicating that the microRNAs sharing more functional similarity with the known cancer-related microRNAs can be better predicted. Subsequently, we picked two groups of disease similarity datasets: I) The similarity score list between breast neoplasms (lung neoplasms) and the diseases that are associated with the predicted microRNAs of breast neoplasms (lung neoplasms); II) The similarity score list between breast neoplasms (lung neoplasms) and the diseases that are not related to the predicted microRNAs of breast neoplasms (lung neoplasms). Similarly, we got the extremely significant p-values of 2.85E-42 and 5.22E-7. This result is consistent with the principle of phenotypically similar diseases tend to be related to functionally related microRNAs. All above outcomes demonstrated that our method could be effective tools to directly explore the potential microRNA-disease associations.
      
    
    
      Discussion and Conclusions
      In this article, we developed a combinatorial prioritization approach by integrating microRNA functional similarity network, disease semantic and phenotypic similarity network and known microRNA-disease associations into a phenome-microRNAome network to predict the novel microRNA-disease associations by maximizing network information flow. We demonstrated the effectiveness and robustness of our method for predicting the novel microRNA-disease associations by a suite of cross-validation experiments and independent validation experiment. We compared our method with 5 existing inference methods, which showed superior performance of our method over those existing methods. Case studies of breast neoplasms and lung neoplasms were implemented, and the top 30 microRNA candidates related to these two cancers are confirmed by databases and published literatures. Particularly, we showed that the ensemble-based approach by aggregating all these methods can remarkably upgrade the predictive performance. All these results demonstrated that our method provides the reliable microRNA-disease links for experimental validation, which can facilitate biomedical research of the microRNAs participating in the pathogenesis of diseases.
      The success of our method full revealed that the strengths of associations between a query microRNA (disease) and the candidate diseases (microRNAs) can be largely captured by the maximum information flow transmitted from the query microRNA (disease) to the candidate diseases (microRNAs). Using the flow network model, our method integrated the different heterogeneous biological data sources to establish the microRNAome-phenome network and considered all paths between microRNAs and diseases. Such a system-level integration of the different types of biological datasets can effectively advance the model’s capability for inferring the associations between microRNAs and diseases. Firstly, microRNA functional similarity network was used to capture the biological relevance between two microRNAs. Secondly, the disease semantic and phenotypic similarity network was adopted to measure the pathological relevance between two diseases. Thirdly, the known microRNA-disease associations, microRNA cluster and family data were integrated to build the weighted network of microRNA-disease associations, which can accurately characterize biological links between microRNAs and diseases.
      Although the maximizing information flow approach (MAXIF) has been adopted to prioritize the disease-associated protein-coding genes7, it has still not been employed to predict the microRNA-disease associations. Moreover, our method differs from the MAXIF method in the procedure of building heterogeneous biological network. The main innovations of our study are summarized as follows. I) Our method considers the global relevance between diseases and microRNAs, and thus can overcome the restrictions of the inference methods that rely on the local searching. II) Our method does not need the negative samples, which can effectively solve the problem that the current negative microRNA-disease associations are difficult or even impossible to obtain since there are no known non-associations between microRNAs and diseases. III) Our method can effectively predict the microRNAs (diseases) related to the given disease (microRNA) whose microRNAs (diseases) association information is not available. IV) We demonstrated that the ensemble-based method can obtain better predictions than those using single predictor. Although there are various advantages of our models, the limitations still exist. Our methods can be further improved in the following three aspects. I) The predictive capability of the network flow model can be enhanced by adding the updated high-quality microRNA-disease associations. II) Other bioinformatics data sources, such as the Gene Ontology (GO), gene expression profile and pathway information could be integrated to improve the model’s inference ability. In practice, this can be solved by incorporating multiple omics datasets into a unified network using the statistical technologies818283. And III) more accurate and complete building of the microRNA functional similarity and disease semantic and phenotype similarity network could also effectively advance the performance of our proposed approach.
    
    
      Material and Methods
      
        Experimental dataset
        The HMDD database created by Lu et al. includes 10237 associations among 572 microRNAs and 378 diseases collected from 3450 publications (June 20, 2013). The miR2Disease database contains 3273 associations between 349 microRNAs and 163 diseases (Mar 14, 2011). The updated MNDR database contains 202 Mus musculus microRNA-disease associations. The current version dbDEMC database is comprised of 590 mature microRNAs and 17 precursor microRNAs, which are differentially expressed in 14 cancers revealed by 48 biological experiments in the peer-reviewed publications. In this work, we downloaded the human microRNA-disease association dataset from the previous literature56, in which the associations were extracted from the HMDD database (November-2010 Version). In the meanwhile, the incorrect links with invalid names of the diseases and microRNAs were excluded. This dataset comprises 2076 associations among 338 microRNAs and 199 diseases, which were treated as the gold standard dataset for the performance evaluation of our proposed method in the validation experiments and the training dataset for inferring the novel microRNA-disease associations (see Dataset 1). Here we did not adopt the latest version of the data in HMDD and the datasets contained in other databases to build model because the microRNA-disease associations predicted by our models can be assessed by the novel associations introduced to HMDD and other databases. The microRNAs families and clusters information were obtained from the literature39, which contains 75 human microRNA families and 65 microRNA clusters (see Dataset 2).
        The disease MeSH descriptors were extracted from the National Library of Medicine database (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/). There are 16 categories included in this database, for example, Category A for anatomic terms, Category B for organism terms and Category C for disease terms. We selected the relationships between diseases from the MeSH descriptors of Category C based on their Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Their phenotypic similarities were obtained by using the text mining analysis of the phenotype descriptions in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database8485. Since the names of OMIM diseases are differently from those in MeSH, we extracted the mapping information from the comparative toxicogenomics database (http://ctdbase.org/) and searched against OMIM database for the OMIM number. The potential target genes of microRNA were predicted using the programs of PITA86, TargetScan87 and miSVR-miRanda88. In details, 4,095,752 associations among 677 microRNAs and 16,942 targets were retrieved from the PITA target catalog; 2,913,338 associations among 2318 microRNAs and 11,161 targets were obtained from the TargetScan. And 12,907,802 associations among 1100 microRNAs and 19885 targets were extracted from the www.microRNA.org, which was predicted by miSVR-miRanda.
      
      
        MicroRNA functional similarity network
        Two microRNA functional similarity networks were used to assess the performance of our proposed method. On one hand, we obtained the known microRNA functional similarity network from the literature56. In this network, a similarity score for two microRNAs is calculated based on the hypothesis that microRNAs sharing similar biological roles are often associated with the phenotypically similar diseases. On other hand, we calculated the functional similarity between two microRNAs based on their target gene similarity. The functional similarity of every microRNA pair is defined as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where Ncom_gene is the number of shared targets of microRNA i and microRNA j, miRi_gene and miRj_gene is the number of targets of microRNA i and microRNA j, respectively. Based on the similarity score of each microRNA pair, the microRNA functional similarity network was constructed as a weighted graph, where vertexes represent the group of n microRNAs. Two vertexes mi and mj were connected by an edge in the network if they are functionally similar. Since most of low values of similarity scores are likely to be noise and only high scores have obvious biological meanings, we introduced a threshold α for this network, and only retaining the edges between microRNAs with the functional similarities that are larger than or equal to the threshold.
      
      
        Disease semantic and phenotypic similarity network
        We inferred the disease semantic similarity based on the information content of each disease term56. Based the assumption that a more concrete disease contains the more information, the information content of disease MeSH term S can be defined as the negative log of the likelihood of it appearing in all DAGs of the diseases (p(S)), i.e. IC(S) = −log(p(S)). The semantic value of a disease S was then defined as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where TS indicates the group of all ancestor diseases of S, including disease S itself. DVS(t) represents the semantic value of the parent disease t associated with disease S. Based on the hypothesis that the disease pairs sharing larger ratio of their DAGs are more conceptually similar, the semantic similarity between two diseases A and B can be then calculated as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where TA and TB represent the groups of all ancestor diseases of A and B, including disease A and disease B themselves. DVA(t) and DVB(t) denote the semantic values of parent disease t associated with disease A and disease B, respectively.
        Considering that phenotypic similarities do not contain all diseases, we incorporated the semantic similarity score and phenotypic similarity score between the diseases as their disease semantic and phenotypic similarity. For the disease pair with known OMIM number, the semantic and phenotypic similarity between them was defined as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where SS(A, B) is the semantic similarity score between disease A and disease B, and PS(A, B) is the phenotypic similarity score between disease A and disease B. For the disease pair with unknown OMIM number, their semantic similarities were directly treated as semantic and phenotypic similarities. Based on this, we can obtain the disease semantic and phenotypic similarity network in which the vertexes denote diseases and the weighted edges indicate their similarities. To effectively filter the noise information of this network, we set a threshold β and only retaining the edges between diseases with the similarity values that are larger than or equal to the threshold.
      
      
        MicroRNA-disease association network
        MicroRNA-disease association network was built by integrating microRNA-disease associations, microRNA family and cluster information. Firstly, we constructed a heterogeneous network consisting of two types of nodes based on the relationships between microRNAs and diseases. In the heterogeneous network, the nodes stand for either microRNAs or diseases, and links represent the associations between them. If a disease is known to be associated with a microRNA, we assigned a link between the microRNA and the disease. The weights of all edges in this heterogeneous network were set to γ. Subsequently, the members of microRNA families and clusters were assigned larger weights since they are more likely to associate with the similar diseases89. The allocation strategy is described as follows. To begin with, we defined the ratio of microRNAs associated with disease d for the pth family or cluster as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where NmiRNA_d is the number of disease d-related microRNAs of pth microRNA family or cluster, Sf is the size of pth microRNA family or cluster. In terms of the microRNAs pertaining to the pth family and a fraction of microRNAs in this family are related to disease d. The link weight of the microRNAs with respect to disease d in the pth family should be larger than γ and is calculated as,
        
          
            
          
        
        where η is a parameter for correcting the weight. With regard to the microRNAs in the microRNA clusters, we adopted the same weight assignment strategy as in the microRNA family. The link weight of the microRNAs in the pth cluster concerning d is defined as
        
          
            
          
        
        where σ is a factor for rectifying the weight. With respect to the microRNAs in both microRNA family and cluster, we assigned the link weight of the microRNAs with reference to d as,
        
          
            
          
        
        Based on the definitions above, we can get a weighted microRNA-disease association network, where vertex Mi and vertex Dj are linked if microRNA i is related to disease j.
      
      
        MicroRNAome-phenome network
        MicroRNAome-phenome network was built by combining the microRNA functional similarity network, the disease semantic and phenotypic similarity network and the microRNA-disease association network. We refer to microRNA functional similarity network and disease semantic and phenotype similarity network as microRNAome and phenome, respectively. Obviously, the microRNAome-phenome network is a multi-layer network, whose nodes are the microRNAs or the diseases included in microRNAome and phenome, and whose links include the similarity relationships in microRNAome and phenome and the known associations between microRNAs and diseases. In this network, for each link (u,v), we defined a capacity function f(u,v) by assigning the weight value of each link as the capacity value c(u,v), which indicates the probability of two nodes are associated with each other. With these definitions, we denoted the microRNAome-phenome network as an undirected graph,
        
          
            
          
        
        where V represents a group of either microRNAs or diseases and E is the group of weighted links indicating the capacity values flowing through microRNAs or diseases.
      
      
        Combinatorial prioritization algorithm
        Network information flow model has been adopted in bioinformatics and systems biology909192. Using this model, we designed a combinatorial prioritization algorithm to predict microRNA-disease associations. Given a query microRNA (disease), our goal is to prioritize diseases (microRNAs) that are related to this microRNA (disease) from a set of candidate diseases (microRNAs). To achieve this, for each combination of query disease (microRNA) and candidate microRNA (disease), we computed an association score by maximizing network information flow.
        For microRNA prioritization, a given query disease d, the candidate microRNA set S and the microRNAome-phenome network UG were first imported into our model. The modeling procedure of our method was designed as follow.
        (I) We substituted the undirected microRNAome-phenome network with a directed network by splitting each undirected links (u, v) into two distinct directed links (u, v) and (u, v).
        (II) We modified and redefined the capacity formula between two vertexes as
        (III) Given a query disease d, we introduced a source node s, and assigned a directed link with an infinite capacity toward to it. Similarly, for every candidate microRNA contained in S, we introduced a sink node t and an infinite capacity and directed link pointing from this candidate microRNA to t. Thus, we got a new network DG.
        (IV) In the new network, the capacity formula was redefined as
        (V) The maximum information flow f* from the source node s over all edges to the sink node t in the directed graph DG was calculated using the push-relabel algorithm93.
        (VI) For each candidate microRNA u contained in S, we calculated the amount of flow leaving it aswhere DV represents the group of vertexes in the DG.
        (VII) We used the flow quantity leaving microRNA u as a score to measure the extent of association between u and the query disease d. According to the obtained scores, the candidate microRNAs were sorted into to a ranked list.
        For the disease prioritization, we reconstructed the information flow network model based on the microRNAome-phenome network by introducing a source node, a sink node, an infinite capacity and directed link pointing from the source node to the query microRNA and a series of infinite capacity and directed links pointing from the candidate diseases to the sink node. Based on this network structure and push-relabel maximum flow algorithm, we defined an association score for each candidate disease as the information flow leaving it and then ranked the diseases according to their scores. We multiplied all capacities in the flow network by a large number 1000 and round the resulting capacities to integers when using this algorithm. Figure 4 depicts the flowchart of the whole modeling procedure.
      
      
        Model validation and evaluation
        To evaluate the performance of our proposed method in discovering microRNAs that were known to be related to the certain diseases from a set of candidate microRNAs, we implemented two types of cross-validation experiments. Experiment 1: Given a known association between a query disease and a microRNA in each run, a series of leave-one-out cross-validation experiments were conducted, in which we suppose the association was unknown and prioritized the microRNA against a series of candidate microRNAs. Experiment 2: we conducted a series of ab initio cross-validations to demonstrate that our network flow model is applicable to the isolate diseases without the known-associated microRNAs, in which we removed all known links between the query disease and their associated microRNAs, and prioritized the microRNA against a series of candidate microRNAs. Note the candidate microRNAs were randomly selected from the microRNA set, which was obtained from all microRNA in the benchmark dataset after deleting the query disease related microRNA (microRNAs). To assess the predictive performance of our approach in predicting diseases for the certain query microRNAs, we reconstructed the network flow model and performed the same cross-validation experiments (leave-one-out and ab initio) as adopted in the microRNA prioritization. Additionally, the external independent validations were also performed to evaluate the generalization ability of the obtained models. The newly reported microRNA-disease associations of the HMDD, miR2Disease and dbDEMC databases were used as the external independent validation dataset, in which we only selected the links whose microRNAs and diseases were included in the standard microRNA-disease association dataset for validation (November-2010 Version).
        We adopted the Receiver Operation Characteristic (ROC) curve and Precision-Recall (PR) curve to evaluate the predictive performance of the proposed method. After each cross-validation experiment, we obtained a ranked microRNA-disease association list. We divided their ranks with the number of microRNA-disease pairs in the list to calculate rank ratios of microRNAs-disease pairs. Given a threshold of rank ratio, if the rank ratio of a microRNA-disease pair exceeds it, we considered the microRNA and the disease were associated. If an experimentally confirmed microRNA-disease association with rank ratio is higher than a given threshold, we considered it as successfully predicted. Based on these, we calculated the True Positive Ratio (TPR, also known as Sensitivity or Recall) as the proportion of successfully predicted microRNA-disease associations to all known microRNA-disease associations. The False Positive Ratio (FPR, also known as 1-specificity) was defined as the fraction of predicted negative microRNA-disease associations (i.e. the microRNA-disease pairs with the rank ratio higher than the given threshold but was not included in the known microRNA-disease associations) to all negative microRNA-disease associations. The Precision refer to the percentage of successfully predicted associations between microRNAs and diseases to all microRNA-disease associations with the rank ratio higher than the given threshold. We draw a Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve by changing the threshold and plotting the TPR (sensitivity) versus the FPR and then calculate the score of Area Under Curve. Similarly, the Precision-Recall (PR) curve was plotted by altering the threshold and plotting the Precision versus the Recall. Obviously, the larger AUC scores of ROC curve and PR curve indicate the higher performance of our proposed method. The F1 score defined below was adopted as performance indicator to obtain the optimal threshold
        
          
            
          
        
      
      
        Availability
        The source codes of six inference methods including our combinatorial prioritization algorithm, Jiang’s method, RWRMDA, HDMP, RLSMDA and NCPMDA is freely available at https://github.com/huayu1111/M2DMiners.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Yu, H. et al. Large-scale prediction of microRNA-disease associations by combinatorial prioritization algorithm. Sci. Rep.
7, 43792; doi: 10.1038/srep43792 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Information
        
        
      
      
        
          Supplementary Dataset 1
        
        
      
      
        
          Supplementary Dataset 2
        
        
      
    
  
        Beyond the physiology of reproduction, estrogen controls the homeostasis of several tissues. Although macrophages play a key role in tissue remodeling, the interplay with estrogen is still ill defined. Using a transcriptomic approach we first obtained a comprehensive list of genes that are differentially expressed in peritoneal macrophages in response to physiological levels of 17β-estradiol (E2) injected in intact female mice. Our data also showed the dynamic nature of the macrophage response to E2 and pointed to specific biological programs induced by the hormone, with cell proliferation, immune response and wound healing being the most prominent functional categories. Indeed, the exogenous administration of E2 and, more importantly, the endogenous hormonal surge proved to support macrophage proliferation in vivo, as shown by cell cycle gene expression, BrdU incorporation and cell number. Furthermore, E2 promoted an anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving macrophage phenotype, which converged on the induction of genes related to macrophage alternative activation and on IL-10 expression in vivo. Hormone action was maintained in an experimental model of peritoneal inflammation based on zymosan injection. These findings highlight a direct effect of estrogen on macrophage expansion and phenotypic adaptation in homeostatic conditions and suggest a role for this interplay in inflammatory pathologies.
      
    Macrophages are key cells in inflammation and immunity and can adopt different activation states depending on the activating signal and context. Schematically, inflammatory macrophages adopt a classical (M1) activation phenotype, which is mimicked in vitro by exposure to interferon-γ and toll-like receptor ligands, characterized by the synthesis and/or secretion of cytotoxic and chemotactic mediators that promote inflammation and the killing of pathogens and tumors. Immunoregulatory signals produced by surrounding cells, including interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13, or by activated macrophages, namely IL-10 and TGFβ, stimulate alternative programs of phenotypic activation which promote resolution of inflammation, tissue repair, and homeostasis restoration, frequently alluded to as M2. M1 and M2 activation states are two extremes of a range of intermediate phenotypes that macrophages can acquire through their unique ability to integrate a vast array of signals under the constraint of environmental factors. The macrophage phenotype is also influenced by systemic endogenous molecules that tune their ability to respond to danger signals, as exemplified by glucocorticoid hormones1. Thus, different activation profiles provide reactive macrophages with immune and metabolic properties that address them towards specialized tasks sustained by distinct gene expression programs2.
    Estrogen hormones are lipophilic molecules with pleiotropic functions including a well-documented influence on the inflammatory process, as revealed by the variation of chronic inflammatory diseases occurrence and response to infections in relation with the menstrual cycle, pregnancy and menopause34. Estrogen effects on immune activity are also revealed by the higher rate of autoimmune diseases in women when compared to men, and by the strict dependence of symptomatology depending on women’s estrogen levels5. Experimental models have shown that the development of innate immune cells and the immune responses to danger signals are highly influenced by estrogen, converging on an anti-inflammatory effect of this hormone in dose and context-dependent manners46. Accordingly, animal models of inflammation are highly responsive to estrogen insufficiency and replacement.
    Estrogen action is mediated by its interaction with estrogen receptors (ERs), ERα and ERβ, which operates as hormone-regulated transcription factors as well as through non-genomic effects, such as calcium influx or lipid kinase activation, also mediated by a more recently described G protein-coupled estrogen receptor, GPR30. ERs and GPR30 were shown to be expressed by human and mouse macrophages and to influence inflammation, with ERα being one key mediator of the estrogen anti-inflammatory activity in these cells678910. While the impact of estrogen and macrophage physiology is gaining intriguing insights for both endocrine and immune implications and for human pathologies1112, our knowledge of the transcriptional response of macrophages to this hormone is limited to the effect of the hormone on specific molecular targets, such as VEGFα or inflammatory cytokines, in cells exposed to specific immunologic ligands131415. The aim of this study was to provide a comprehensive description of the transcriptional response of macrophages to this hormone evaluating the genomic and functional response of macrophages exposed in vivo to physiological changes in estrogen levels.
    
      Results
      
        Gene expression profiling of peritoneal macrophages in response to estrogen in vivo
        ERs are ligand-dependent transcription factors that induce genomic responses by the direct interaction with target gene promoters as well as through indirect secondary mechanisms. Since peritoneal macrophages were shown to express ERs1315, we envisioned to analyze the transcriptomic response to estrogen of peritoneal macrophages. Female mice were selected in the metaestrous (ME) phase of the estrous cycle, bearing low levels of circulating estrogens, and either left untreated or injected with a physiological dose of E2. This approach provides an experimental asset to more faithfully mimic the mechanisms induced by the physiological estrogen surge in intact animals. After 3 or 24 h of hormone injection, peritoneal macrophages were purified by immunosorting, RNA extracted and analyzed by RNA sequencing. Our data show that short and long term hormonal treatments significantly affected expression levels of 569 transcripts in total. When data were analyzed grouping up- or down-regulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) according to onset and duration of hormone action considered as net effect, four gene clusters could be identified: cluster I) collects DEGs related to early and transient effects (only regulated at 3 h); cluster II) gathers DEGs supporting persistent responses (similarly modulated by 3 and 24 h treatments); cluster III) includes early and progressively responsive genes (regulated at 3 h and furthermore at 24 h treatment); cluster IV) contains late responsive genes (only influenced after 24 h treatment) (Fig. 1a). Analysis of clusters kinetics showed that a significant fraction of DEGs (35%; clusters I + II) are already modulated 3 h after E2 administration thus behaving as early responsive genes. Only a minor fraction of them returned to control levels after 24 h treatment (16%; cluster I), while the majority of all DEGs are modulated at this late time point (84%; clusters II + III + IV). Progressively responsive genes represent the highest number of regulated genes (37%; Cluster III), while genes regulated only at late time point constitute a high proportion of genes (28%; cluster IV) (Fig. 1b). The list of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), ranked by their sensitivity to estrogen in comparative analyses, and its association with the respective cluster is shown in Supplementary Table 1.
        Several transcription factors, including ERs, may participate in regulating DEGs expression. In order to gain insight into the mechanisms of hormone responsiveness, motif enrichment analysis was conducted to search for transcriptional regulatory elements in the promoters of macrophage DEGs. Each cluster included unique transcription factors that are involved either in the up- or down-regulation effects, with up-regulated genes in cluster I showing a high abundance of binding sites for C/EBP transcription factors, an enrichment for E2f binding sites in cluster II, and for Irf and Stat families of transcription factors in cluster IV (Fig. 1c). In parallel, specific transcriptional regulators are involved also in the down-regulation of DEGs in a cluster-specific manner. Analysis of ER binding sites16 shows cross-interference among different clusters, as this regulatory element is enriched with similar frequency of DEGs enhancers/promoters in all fours clusters (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1). Thus, these analyses support the hypothesis that early and late effects induced by estrogen on macrophage transcriptome are mediated by direct ERE-mediated mechanisms as well as by the ordered engagement of distinct sets of transcription factors that allow the specific temporal profile of gene regulation observed in response to estrogen. Taken together, these data show that the in vivo administration of a physiological dose of E2 results in the regulation of expression of a distinct set of genes in macrophages, an effect which is evident shortly after hormone administration and progresses with time through a balanced combination of positive and negative distinct or overlapping pathways.
      
      
        Functional modifications associated with estrogen action in macrophages
        In order to translate comprehensive genomic information into functional relevance, we performed functional annotation analyses using Gene Ontology term enrichment to search for significant terms related with biological programs. Enrichment of specific biologic categories (Supplementary Table 2) showed that, in analogy with gene expression, the time-course evaluation of estrogen action identifies biological programs that are either uniquely or commonly regulated as early or late responses to estrogen in macrophages (Fig. 2a). Genes showing early and transient response to estrogen resulted enriched in specific gene ontologies including transcription factors, apoptosis, stress response, and protein folding, while the ontology related with lipid metabolism was enriched as a late responsive pathway. However, three functional programs clearly emerged as persistent estrogen-responsive pathways in macrophages: these relate with cell cycle, immune response, and wound healing. As shown in Fig. 2b, a search for functional interactions using the String database resulted in a high number of connections among proteins encoded by genes involved in the Cell cycle, Immune response and Wound healing processes. The first category appears to be supported by the coordinated regulation of a core of highly interconnected genes, while the last two categories share a high number of proteins modulated by estrogen and are known to converge on the alternative polarization of macrophages (Fig. 2b). Interestingly, some of the transcription factors shown in Fig. 1c are known to be involved in cell cycle progression, including C/EBPs and E2fs or in the control of inflammation and macrophage polarization, including NF-kB, FOXP1 and Gabpa17, while some others were shown to regulate both processes, such as Myc18, further supporting the functional implications of estrogen action on macrophages and providing a first hint on the underlying molecular mechanisms. Altogether, these results show that estrogen induces in macrophages specific biological pathways related to distinct functional responses supported by an highly interconnected network of hormone-responsive genes.
      
      
        Estrogen modulates gene expression in isolated macrophages
        Binding sites for ERs are present in the promoters of some of the DEGs in clusters I-IV. In order to ascertain that the transcriptional response of macrophages to estrogen was mediated by a direct effect of the hormone, macrophages were grown in culture and assayed for estrogen action on the expression of target genes, with or without EREs in their promoters. Peritoneal macrophages and BMDMs were cultured ex vivo and assayed for the expression of estrogen target genes in response to E2; since the peritoneal fluid in women may contain micromolar concentrations of ovarian hormones through exudation during ovarian follicle development and rupture, E2 concentrations higher than the nanomolar plasmatic range were also tested, although anatomical differences may lead to a reduction in estrogen concentrations in the female mouse peritoneum1920. As shown in Fig. 3a, transcripts coding for Angtpl-4 and VEGFα, cluster I and II ERE-positive genes respectively, were modulated by increasing concentrations of estrogen in isolated macrophages. Interestingly, levels of transcript coding for Arg1, a cluster II gene with no ERE in its promoter/enhancer region, were also significantly increased by short-term estrogen treatment, though the overall effect of estrogen was significantly lower. The effect of hormone in isolated macrophages was similar to that observed in vivo with superimposable fold-inductions in the mRNAs analyzed (see Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 1). To further validate the involvement of estrogen-specific signaling pathways, we evaluated hormone action on the genes reported above using macrophages from ERα-KO animals. Consistent with previous reports from this and other groups682122 ablation of ERα gene resulted in loss of estrogen action in macrophages, as estrogen-induced changes in the mRNA levels coding for Vegfα, Angtpl4 and Arg1 observed in WT cells were not detected in ERα-KO macrophages (Fig. 3b). Altogether, these data suggest that estrogen acts directly on macrophages to induce a complex gene expression program mediated, at least in part, by the ERα receptor.
      
      
        Estrogen regulates the expression of genes associated to proliferation and macrophage polarization
        The identification of estrogen-responsive genes and the indication of specific biological pathways modified by estrogen suggest that macrophages may undergo functional changes in response to varying hormonal levels. Cell replication and polarization consistently emerged as hormone-responsive programs and were thus selected for deeper investigation. We thus set our next experiments to extend our observation by further modifying hormonal treatments and, more importantly, to evaluate the effects of changes in endogenous estrogen. As a first step, gene expression data obtained by RNA sequencing were validated using semi-quantitative analyses on peritoneal macrophages extracted from female mice at ME or following E2 treatments for 3, 24 and 48 h. In addition, a group of females in the estrous phase, which immediately follows the rapid physiological surge of estrogens, were also included in the analyses in order to evaluate macrophage gene expression in response to the endogenous increase in female hormones. Figure 4a and b show that mRNA levels of genes associated to actively replicating cells, such as Ki67 and Ube2c, and coding for proteins related with cell cycle phases, namely CcnD1 gene for the G1/S phase and CcnB2 and Cdk1 genes for the G2/M phase, were increased following the administration of exogenous estrogen. For all genes but Ki67 and CcnD1, the highest induction was reached after 3 h treatment followed by a substantial decrease at later time-points. Interestingly, the expression of some of these genes was also significantly increased in the estrous phase, showing that also the endogenous surge of female hormones is followed by an increased expression of cell cycle and replication genes in macrophages. Transcripts coding for proteins associated with macrophage polarization phenotypes, such as Arg1, Ym1, CD206 and VEGFα, were also upregulated by estrogen with the highest induction occurring shortly after hormone administration. Interestingly, for these genes the effect was still observed at extended time points (Fig. 4c). Arg1 and Vegfα mRNAs are also increased in macrophages from females at estrous, further demonstrating that the endogenous surge of female hormones is associated with an increased expression of genes that are related with the immune polarization of these cells. Taken together, these data demonstrate that genes coding for proteins involved in cell cycle progression and in M2 polarization are induced by an increase in either exogenous or endogenous estrogen levels.
      
      
        Increased estrogen levels promote macrophage proliferation in vivo
        Peritoneal macrophages are maintained in steady state by a low rate self-renewal process232425. As transcriptional profile data show that estrogen regulates a significant number of genes associated to proliferation while having a minor effect on inflammatory cytokines involved in leukocyte recruitment, we addressed the possibility that E2 acts as a proliferative signal for peritoneal macrophages. In agreement with its induction at the transcriptional level (Fig. 4a and b), a significant increase in the fraction of Ki67+ peritoneal macrophages was observed in animals treated for 24–48 h with E2 (Fig. 5a and b). Accordingly, females in the estrous phase have a higher number of Ki67+ macrophages cells in the peritoneum compared with ME females (Fig. 5b). Thus, these results suggest that an increase in circulating estrogen levels enhances the proliferation rate of peritoneal macrophages. To further extend this functional evidence, BrdU was administered in vivo 2 h before sacrifice and its incorporation into the DNA of peritoneal macrophages was assessed to quantify cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle. Figure 5c shows that a 24 h treatment with E2 significantly increased the percentage of cells that were duplicating their DNA. BrdU incorporation was not increased in the other experimental groups, suggesting that the effect on DNA duplication was restricted to a specific time window of E2 action encompassing the first 24 h after treatment without being detected in the estrous phase or at a later time point (48 h; Fig. 5d), when the increased number of cells progressing in the cell cycle (assessed by Ki67 expression in Fig. 5b) is probably too small to allow the detection of cells within the S-phase. Of note, the amplitude of estrogen action on BrdU incorporation is similar to that reported for IL-4, the best-characterized signal inducing local expansion of peritoneal macrophages in inflammatory conditions26.
        As genomic data and functional evidence indicated that an increased number of macrophages in the S-phase of the cell cycle is present in the peritoneum of estrogen-treated female mice, we asked whether the number of peritoneal macrophages could be influenced by alterations in the endogenous levels of estrogen. Indeed, ovariectomized (ovx) female mice, in which production and biological effects of endogenous estrogen are ceased, showed a significant reduction in the number of peritoneal macrophages as compared to sham-operated animals, an effect that was completely reverted by a long-term exposure to exogenous E2 (Fig. 5e). Peritoneal macrophages are a heterogeneous population of cells, which includes large peritoneal macrophages (LPM), characterized by the expression of the transcription factor Gata6, and small peritoneal macrophages (SPM), a less abundant subset of macrophages that derive from circulating monocytes232425. The abundance of LPS, SPM and other leukocyte populations, as well as the efficiency of cell recovery procedures were not altered by changes in estrogen levels (see Supplementary Fig. 2). Altogether, these data demonstrate that the endogenous or exogenous surge of estrogen enhances peritoneal macrophage proliferation. The proliferative signature of macrophages exposed to estrogen correlates with an increase in their number, in the absence of a significant increase in other leukocyte types.
      
      
        Estrogen promotes macrophage alternative polarization in an in vivo model of self-resolving inflammation.
        Among estrogen-regulated gene ontologies, the Immune response and Wound healing categories include overlapping functions associated with the alternative polarization of macrophages, a process that progressively shapes macrophage immunometabolic properties to sustain the resolution of inflammation and tissue remodeling. To evaluate macrophage polarization as a dynamic response to estrogen, ovariectomized mice were repeatedly administered estrogen for prolonged periods of time and macrophages were sorted from the peritoneum and analyzed for their expression of genes associated with the polarized activation. Ovariectomy did not alter the basal expression of Arg1, Tgm2, and Vegfα mRNAs, while E2 treatment significantly increased the mRNA levels of these M2 markers (Fig. 6a), consistent with our results reported in Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 1. Of note, also in this setting we detected a significant induction of Ki67 expression, in agreement with the proliferative effect observed on peritoneal macrophages (Fig. 5). Interestingly, polarization gene expression returned to basal levels after 60 h of estrogen replacement, suggesting that this late time point was either associated with a reduced responsiveness to estrogen or that a phenotypic transition of macrophages to the resolution phase was occurring27. Consistent with this latter hypothesis, after long time exposure to estrogen macrophages showed a significant increase in IL-10 expression (Fig. 6a), a key mediator in the resolution phase of inflammation27, together with a reduction in F4/80 mean fluorescence intensity (see Fig. 5e and Supplementary Fig. 2). These results demonstrate that, beyond proliferation, estrogen induces polarization phenotype in peritoneal macrophages that progressively evolves with time through specialized anti-inflammatory and reparative immune properties.
        To define the functional relevance of these events, we adopted a mouse model of transient self-resolving peritoneal inflammation induced by zymosan injection, in which the initial phase of inflammation associated with a massive recruitment of PMN and a concomitant reduction in the number of peritoneal macrophages is followed by the spontaneous resolution of the inflammatory process accompanied by a modest recruitment of monocyte and the progressive return to normal values of peritoneal macrophages2829. The role of estrogen in the model was evaluated treating ovx mice with vehicle or E2 immediately before zymosan injection and after 24 and 48 h and monitoring its impact on the kinetics of infiltrating cells during the course of inflammation. Sham-operated female mice were used as controls. In agreement with results shown in Fig. 5f, neither ovx nor estrogen administration to ovx mice influenced the number of PMN or monocytes, which varies in the peritoneum during the course of the inflammatory reaction (Fig. 6b and c, respectively). The absence of estrogen did not influence the cellular repopulation of the peritoneum, at least within the time frame analyzed in this experiment, but a significant increase in number of peritoneal macrophages was observed after long term estrogen treatment (Fig. 6d), indicating that estrogen administration provides an immune trigger for macrophages, in agreement with data reported in Fig. 5. Of note, also in these experimental settings estrogen induced the expression of polarization genes in macrophages. Zymosan-induced expression of Arg1 was potentiated by 36 h estrogen treatment in ovx animals, and its reduced expression after 60 h zymosan injection in ovx compared to sham-operated animals is partially rescued by estrogen administration (Fig. 6e). Similarly, the induction of Vegfα mRNA was also modulated by hormone levels after 36 h of inflammation (Fig. 6f). In agreement with this anti-inflammatory effect of estrogen, TNFα expression is increased by hormone loss and strongly reduced by estrogen treatment (Fig. 6g), and IL-10 mRNA levels are significantly higher in animals treated for 60 h with estrogen as compared to sham or ovx animals. Thus, during local inflammation estrogen effects progress with time to support an increase in number of peritoneal macrophages and their alternative polarization to sustain the resolution phase. Altogether, these data demonstrate that estrogen increases macrophage number and dynamically shapes their phenotype to promote their anti-inflammatory and healing properties.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      A combination of mechanisms have been shown to support the effects of estrogen on the immune system, including direct genomic and epigenetic effects as well as interactions with transcription factors, co-regulators, cytoplasmic signaling pathways and intercellular communications43031. The present integrated analysis of the in vivo response of macrophages to estrogen has revealed the existence of a physiological endocrine-immune crosstalk that links estrogen action with proliferation of peritoneal macrophages and their immunophenotypic adaptation, thus contributing relevant insights to our understanding of estrogen impacts on the regulation of the inflammatory response. The experimental conditions and transcriptomic approach adopted have led to a detailed temporal prospective of this endocrine-immune interplay and have identified a comprehensive list of molecular mediators involved. Clustering analyses according to the onset and duration of estrogen responsiveness clearly showed the progressive response of macrophages to the estrogen signal, as some genes were regulated as either early or late responses to hormone administration, while others resulted in a sustained or potentiated regulation. The biological pathways most prominently modulated included macrophage proliferation, immune response, transcription factor expression, amino acid utilization, and energy metabolism, and on a whole indicated a key role for estrogen as a physiologic immunoregulatory factor for macrophage biology. Though the identification of the molecular mechanisms underlining the genomic events here reported require future investigation, our study reveals the identity and temporal responsiveness of a comprehensive set of novel estrogen-responsive genes (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2) that represent useful biological indicators of hormone signaling in macrophages.
      It has recently been demonstrated that peritoneal macrophages are maintained by local self-renewal, with a low level of proliferation throughout life regulated by growth factors and immune mediators including CSF-1 and IL-42332333435. Functional annotation of DEGs suggested that estrogen also acts as a proliferative signal for peritoneal macrophages. From a physiological point of view, our results provide a novel view of estrogen action in peritoneal homeostasis, in which macrophages are stimulated by estrogen to adapt and develop specific immune regulatory functions, possibly to cope with estrogen-induced changes in the environment. The nature of these concomitant events may include ovulation, with the need of increased macrophage number and activation in order to handle the wound healing response associated with follicle rupture and the induction of an immunotolerant environment which either favors egg fertilization and further implantation or participates in elimination of dead cells and tissue debris resulting from luteal or atretic follicle degradation. The advantage for estrogen to induce macrophage proliferation instead of monocytes recruitment is unclear. As the estrogen surge occurs every 4–5 days in mice and it is perpetuated throughout the fertile life of females, it is possible that such circumstances direct the request of resident macrophages towards the expansion of local cells, a process that is energetically more favorable than the constant increase of hematopoietic precursors and their migration into the peritoneum35. This leads to speculate that LPM are the cellular target among peritoneal macrophages that respond to the hormonal signal, although our data only show a trend in the abundance of this macrophage subset following hormone manipulations, without reaching statistical significance (Supplementary Fig. 2). Further studies are thus needed to better characterize the macrophage subset of estrogenic responders. Interestingly, our data also show that genes related with lipid metabolism are modulated by the hormone. Although not addressed in the present study, this evidence represents an additional indication of the metabolic adaptation of macrophages induced by estrogen which might serve the role of directing cholesterol and phospholipid metabolism towards the formation of membranes required for cell proliferation.
      Macrophage proliferation has been observed in selected murine and human tumors3637, including peritoneal neoplasia3839 and in Th2 inflammatory conditions26, with variable involvement of IL-4 and CSF-1 depending on the specific experimental conditions40. Though a deep investigation of the underlying molecular mechanisms was precluded as estrogen proven to be unable to support macrophage proliferation in vitro, similar to what observed for IL-4, in our experimental conditions a significant induction of CSF-1 or IL-4 was not observed, arguing against the hypothesis that the estrogen effect is mediated by these mediators. Indirect mechanisms involving other peritoneal cells able to respond to the hormone cannot be excluded3041, however we observed that EREs are present in the promoter of several cell cycle-related genes identified in the present study, including Chaf1a, CcnB2 and Wee116, suggesting a direct binding of estrogen to the promoter of proliferation-related genes in macrophages.
      This study also provides the first demonstration that in vivo estrogen induces a phenotype resembling alternative macrophage activation that further converts towards a pro-resolving phenotype, as shown by changes induced by hormone replacement on polarization gene expression culminating with the induction of a key immunosuppressive cytokine typically expressed by macrophages during the resolution phase of inflammation, namely IL-10. Importantly, results obtained in the zymosan peritonitis model reveal that these mechanisms are maintained during an acute inflammation of the peritoneum. These results are in agreement with previous studies which suggested that estrogen is involved in macrophage activation and polarization in experimental models of inflammation424344 or in isolated macrophages/cell lines challenged with specific immune stimuli91545. Our study provides a major advancement to this knowledge as it proves estrogen to be per se a physiological regulator of the number and reactivity of peritoneal macrophages in intact healthy animals, in the absence of confounding factors such as recruited circulating monocytes achieved in wound healing or in different models of peritonitis.
      An abundant number of peritoneal macrophages showing a dysregulated polarization have also been involved in endometriosis, a pathological condition caused by the ectopic growth of endometrial cells in the peritoneum464748. In particular, estrogen is known to drive detrimental effects on endometrial lesion development and progression through its well-recognized activity on endometrial cells4950. Macrophages are involved in growth, sustainment and vascularization of endometriosis lesions, and their ability to switch from inflammatory to anti-inflammatory and resolving macrophages is altered in endometriosis46515253. In this respect, the present description of the estrogen-macrophage signaling has intriguing implications for our understanding of endometriosis pathogenesis and therapeutic approaches, and candidate macrophage estrogen-responsive genes identified in this study as potential biomarkers in this clinical setting. Furthermore, the expression of the progesterone receptor is either absent or very limited in peritoneal macrophages, being below the detection limits in our assay. On the contrary, the progesterone receptor is highly expressed in endometrial cells and used as target of current therapeutic interventions for endometriosis that use progesterone analogues to block ER activity. The lack of progesterone receptor in peritoneal macrophages leaves estrogen action unopposed by progestin drugs in these immune cells, with possible reduction in therapeutic efficacy. Although the mechanisms provided in the present work suggest detrimental effect on certain pathologies, such as endometriosis, these events might be involved in the powerful suppressive influence exerted by estrogen in other inflammatory pathologies, such as those affecting the CNS or the lung854.
      To conclude, these results represent a key advancement for the understanding of the impact of estrogen on macrophage physiology and identify novel mechanisms and underlying molecular players of potential pathophysiological relevance.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Animal models and treatments.
        C57BL/6 female mice at 4 months of age were supplied by Charles River Laboratories; ERαKO female mice were obtained from P. Chambon, IGBMC, Strasbourg, France55. Animals were allowed to food and water access ad libitum and kept in temperature-controlled facilities on a 12-hour light and dark cycle. Animals were housed in the animal care facility of the Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences at the University of Milan. The phase of the reproductive cycle in female mice was assessed by blind analysis of vaginal smears mounted on glass microscope slides and stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa method (MGG Quick Stain Kit; Bio-Optica) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 17β-estradiol (E2; Sigma-Aldrich) was administered by a 100 μL s.c. injection of 5 μg/kg E2 dissolved in corn oil by o/n stirring in the dark at room temperature in order to obtain physiologic plasma levels of E256. Ovariectomy (ovx) or sham surgery was performed under mild anesthesia obtained by s.c. injection of 50 μl solution of ketamine (93.6 mg/kg, Ketavet 100; Intervet) and xylazine (7.2 mg/kg, Rompun; Bayer); control animals received corn oil injection. At the specified time points, animals were euthanized by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of lethal ketamine and xylazine solution (150 and 12 mg/kg, respectively). Animal groups (n = 3) for the RNA sequencing experiment were given an estrogen-free diet (AIN93M; Mucedola) 2 weeks before and throughout the experiment. For the zymosan peritonitis model, 4 weeks after sham/ovx surgery mice were injected i.p. with 1 mg of Zymosan (Sigma-Aldrich) in 1 ml of 0.9% NaCl, while control mice received physiological solution alone. Animals were sacrificed after 12, 36 and 60 h. Ovx mice were treated with corn oil or E2 by repeated injections given 3 h before zymosan and 16 h before sacrifice at 36 and 60 h. Macroscopic and weight analyses of uterine tissue were used to confirm the success of ovx and E2 treatments. For in vivo BrdU labelling experiments, mice were injected i.p. with 30 ul of a 10 mg/ml solution of BrdU (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in 0.9% NaCl. Animals were sacrificed 2 h after BrdU injection (n = 4–6). Animal investigation has been conducted in accordance with the ethical standards and according to the Declaration of Helsinki and according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, as adopted and promulgated by the US National Institute of Health, and in accordance with the European Guidelines for Animal Care and Use of Experimental Animals. Experiments were approved by the Italian Ministry of Research and University and controlled by an internal panel of experts.
      
      
        Peritoneal and bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs)
        Peritoneal cells were recovered by peritoneal lavage. Briefly, 5 ml of pre-chilled 0.9% NaCl were injected into the peritoneal cavity using a 21 G needle, cell suspension centrifuged and resuspended in PBS + 0.5%BSA. For in vitro assays, peritoneal cells were incubated with ACK solution (0.15 M NH4Cl, 1 mM KHCO3, 0.1 mM EDTA; pH 7.3) for 5 minutes at 4 °C and seeded at the concentration of 1 × 106 cells/mL in RPMI (Life Technology-Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% endotoxin-free FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% Na pyruvate. After 45 minutes and several washes in PBS, medium was replaced with RPMI w/o phenol red supplemented with 10% dextran coated charcoal (DCC)-FBS (RPMI + 10% DCC). On the next day, cells were treated for 3 h with vehicle or E2 105 M. For RNA sequencing, gene expression validations and proliferative index analyses peritoneal cells were isolated by anti-CD11b antibody loaded MicroBeads (Miltenyi).; Briefly, 107 peritoneal cells were resuspended in 90 μL PBS + 0.5% BSA, and 10 μL CD11b MicroBeads were added to the cell suspension and incubated for 15 min at 4 °C. After washing, cells were resuspended in 500 uL PBS + 0.5% BSA and applied to LS Miltenyi columns (Miltenyi) for the magnetic separation procedure. After 3 washing steps, CD11b-positive cells were eluted from the columns and counted. Cells were either stored in TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) for gene expression studies or fixed for flow cytometry analyses. For cell phenotyping and sorting macrophages were analyzed by flow cytometry, as described below.
        To prepare BMDMs, bone marrow from the tibia and femur was flushed with RPMI (Life Technology-Invitrogen) using a 21 gauge needle. Cells were centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 5 min at 10 °C, seeded in flask cell culture T75 in DMEM + GlutaMAX (Life Technology-Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% endotoxin-free FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% Na pyruvate and incubated o/n. On the next day, the supernatant was collected, seeded at the concentration of 5–8 × 106 cells/dish and grown for 6 days in DMEM + GlutaMAX containing 20% endotoxin-free FBS, 30% L929-cell conditioned media, 1% penicillin and streptomycin, and 1% Na pyruvate. After 6 days BMDMs were harvested with Accutase (Merck-Millipore) and plated at the concentration of 5 × 105 cells/ml. On the next day, RPMI medium w/o phenol red with 10% dextran coated charcoal-FBS was added and cells were treated for 24 h with vehicle or E2 at the specified concentrations; for the 3 h treatment vehicle or E2 were added in the last 3 h of incubation.
      
      
        RNA preparation and analysis
        Total RNA was purified using RNeasy minikit protocol (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, including a step with deoxyribonuclease incubation. For real time PCR, 1 μg RNA (250 ng in peritonitis model) was used for cDNA preparation using 8 U/μl of Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega) in a final volume of 25 μl; the reaction was performed at 37 °C for 1 h, and the enzyme inactivated at 75 °C for 5 min. Control reactions without the addition of the reverse transcription enzyme were performed (data not shown). A 1:4 cDNA dilution was amplified using GoTaq®qPCR Master Mix technology (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The PCR was carried out in triplicate on a 96-well plate using 7900HT fast real time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) with the following thermal profile: 2 min at 95 °C; 40 cycles, 15 sec at 95 °C, 1 min at 60 °C. Primer sequences are reported in Supplementary Table 3. Data were analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCt method. For RNA sequencing, RNA Quality Control was performed on all RNA samples with an electrophoretic run on a Bioanalyzer instrument using the RNA 6000 Nano Kit (Agilent). RNA Integrity Number was determined for every sample and all the samples were considered suitable for processing based on the RNA integrity (RIN > 8). RNA concentration was estimated through spectrophotometric measurement using a Nanoquant Infinite M200 instrument (Tecan). Sequencing libraries were prepared using the TruSeq™ RNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina) using 1.8 ug of total RNA as input. Polyadenylated transcripts were purified using poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads. PolyA RNA was fragmented at 94 °C for 8 min and retrotranscribed using random hexamers. Multiple indexing adapters were ligated to the ends of the cDNA and the amount of DNA in the library was amplified with 10 PCR cycles. Final libraries were validated and quantified with the DNA1000 kit on the Agilent Bioanalyzer Instrument. Pooled libraries were sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx producing an average of 13 M reads per library.
      
      
        Bioinformatics analysis
        BaseCall files were converted to FastQ files using Casava 1.8.2. Sequencing reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using TopHat v.2.0.9. Transcripts were reconstructed and quantified using Cufflinks v2.1.1 and differential expression analysis was performed using CuffDiff58. CuffDiff uses the test statistics T = E[log(y)]/Var[log(y)], where y is the ratio of the normalized counts between two conditions. A t-test is used to calculate the P value for Differential Expression59. A threshold of 0.05 was applied to False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p values in order to select the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) to use in downstream analysis; we also included genes with a log2 fold-change (lgFC) > 1 either showing one anomalous triplicate FPKM value and an FPKM average value between 1 and 2. Heat map of DEGs was made with Genesis software using triplicates mean, after normalization and log2 transformation. Cluster analysis was performed with the Genesis software tool using k-means clustering function (k = 8) in order to identify group of genes with a similar regulation at 3 and 24 h of treatment60; genes with lgFC > +/−0.40 were selected. In each cluster of genes, the regulatory sequences in 20 Kb around the transcription start site were analyzed using iRegulon Cytoscape App and candidate transcription factors were predicted61. Overrepresentation analysis (ORA) on DEGs lists was performed using the Functional Annotation Tool in DAVID website62. The lists of DEGs at 3 and 24 h of estradiol treatment were used as input gene list and the mouse genome was used as background list. Biological processes, molecular functions and KEGG pathways were investigated focusing on enriched terms with a Benjamini adjusted p-value less than 0.05. A Protein-Protein Interaction Network of the differentially expressed genes has been created using STRING63.
      
      
        Flow cytometry analysis
        To assess cell proliferation index, CD11b-positive cells obtained from each animal were divided in 3 aliquots; 2 aliquots of 2.5 × 105 cells each were used to detect BrdU and Ki67 by flow cytometry, the remaining aliquot was used for gene expression. Cells were suspended in 2 ml of pre-chilled ACK solution. For Ki67 staining, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, extensively washed with 125 mM glycine in PBS and permeabilized o/n in PBS containing 0,5% Triton X-100 and 1% BSA, at 4 °C. Cells were incubated with rabbit anti-mouse Ki67 antibody conjugated with eFluor660 (eBioscence-Affymetrix) diluted 1:100 in Incubation Solution (PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 and 0.05% BSA) at room temperature for 1 h. After extensive washes in PBS, cells were analyzed with a flow cytometry system (BD FACS Calibur). For BrdU staining, cells were fixed and permeabilized in 70% EtOH for 30 min at 4 °C and DNA was denaturated with 2 N HCl/0.5% Triton X-100 and incubated 30 min at room temperature. Cells were washed with 0.1 M sodium tetraborate (pH 8.5) and incubated with rat anti-mouse BrdU antibody (AbD Serotec) diluted 1:100 in Incubation Solution (PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 and 1% BSA). After washes in PBS/1%BSA, cells were incubated with Alexa488-conjugated goat anti-rat secondary antibody (1:200 in incubation solution; Molecular Probes) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were extensively washed with PBS, resuspended in PI solution (H2O containing 10% NP40, 1 mg/ml RNase A and 5 μg/ml PI stock; Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were analyzed using FACSCalibur and analyzed with FlowJo version 9 software (Tree Star). Animals with no pulse of BrdU were used for gating strategy to evaluate nonspecific signals.
        In the sham/ovx animals and in the zymosan-induced peritonitis model, immunofluorescent staining of peritoneal cells was performed with V450 anti-mouse CD45, PerCP-Cy5.5 anti- mouse CD11b, FITC anti-mouse Ly6C, PE-Cy7 anti-mouse Ly6G, PE anti-mouse CD11c, PE anti-mouse CD19 (BD Biosciences), AlexaFluor 647 anti-mouse F4/80 (AbD Serotec) and PE anti-mouse CCR3 (R&D Systems). Samples were analyzed using FACS Canto II and DIVA software (BD Biosciences); gating strategies are reported in Supplementary Fig. 1. Resolution indices of zymosan-induced peritonitis were calculated as previously described57. Ly6G-negative CD11b-positive and F4/80-positive macrophages were sorted using sorter Aria (FACS Aria, Becton Dickinson Biosciences) and resuspended in TRIzol reagent for gene expression analyses.
      
      
        Data availability
        Data is available at the NCBI repository through the link http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/376257.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        Statistical significance was carried out with the GraphPad Prism version 5.02 for Windows by a Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons. Unless otherwise stated, “n” indicates biological replicates.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Pepe, G. et al. Self-renewal and phenotypic conversion are the main physiological responses of macrophages to the endogenous estrogen surge. Sci. Rep.
7, 44270; doi: 10.1038/srep44270 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Information
        
        
      
    
  
        Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a unique liver cancer primarily affecting young adults and characterized by a fusion event between DNAJB1 and PRKACA. By analyzing RNA-sequencing data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for >9,100 tumors across ~30 cancer types, we show that the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion is specific to FLCs. We demonstrate that FLC tumors (n = 6) exhibit distinct messenger RNA (mRNA) and long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) profiles compared to hepatocellular carcinoma (n = 263) and cholangiocarcinoma (n = 36), the two most common liver cancers. We also identify a set of mRNAs (n = 16) and lincRNAs (n = 4), including LINC00473, that distinguish FLC from ~25 other liver and non-liver cancer types. We confirm this unique FLC signature by analysis of two independent FLC cohorts (n = 20 and 34). Lastly, we validate the overexpression of one specific gene in the FLC signature, carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12), at the protein level by western blot and immunohistochemistry. Both the mRNA and lincRNA signatures support a major role for protein kinase A (PKA) signaling in shaping the FLC gene expression landscape, and present novel candidate FLC oncogenes that merit further investigation.
      
    Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a rare form of liver cancer, representing ~1% of known liver cancer cases, and primarily occurring in adolescents and young adults without any history of liver disease, steatosis, fibrosis, or cirrhosis1234. Histologically, FLC is unique among liver tumors, as it is characterized by intratumoral lamellar bands of fibrosis, large polygonal cells, eosinophilic cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, and reduced nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio123. Currently, no clinical biomarkers for FLC exist and the majority of patients have metastases at the time of diagnosis. Surgery is the first-line therapeutic for FLC, but tumors often recur even following resection56. Patients with inoperable tumors have very poor prognosis and currently no standard accepted chemotherapeutic regimen for FLC exists356.
    In addition to histology, several other features distinguish FLC from other liver tumors. The average age of onset for FLC patients is ~25 compared to approximately 60 for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) patients123578. While HCC and CCA predominantly affect males, FLC has a relatively balanced gender distribution1. FLC patients typically do not exhibit dramatically elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT), canonical markers of liver inflammation and necrosis123. In contrast, HCC commonly occurs in the context of long-standing cirrhosis often due to chronic hepatitis or alcoholic liver damage8. For this reason, FLC patients generally have more favorable survival compared to HCC and CCA patients. However, after controlling for the presence of cirrhosis, FLC and HCC patients have similar 5-year survival rates9. Finally, recurrent mutations commonly found in HCC (e.g., TERT, TP53, CTNNB1) or CCA (e.g., KRAS, IDH1) have not been identified in FLC tumors231011.
    FLC tumors express markers of biliary and hepatocytic, (e.g. CK7, HepPar-1) as well as neuroendocrine (e.g. PCSK1, NTS) lineages31112131415. We also have shown that FLCs are remarkably rich in cancer stem cells, unlike HCCs and CCAs, and that their gene expression profile more closely resembles that of primitive biliary tree stem cells than any other lineage stage of the liver16. Recently, a heterozygous ~400 kb deletion on chromosome 19 was described in a study of 11 FLC patients17. This deletion was present in all FLC patient tumors, but not in adjacent non-tumor liver, and uniformly led to the chimeric transcript DNAJB1-PRKACA. This chimera swaps exon 1 of PRKACA, the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKA), with exon 1 of DNAJB1, a heat shock protein of the HSP40 family. The DNAJB1-PRKACA transcript is translated into a fusion protein that retains PKA kinase activity13171819. Follow-up studies have detected this fusion in larger cohorts of FLC patients and have proposed that it may be a specific marker of FLC1120.
    Long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) is a class of non-coding RNAs longer than 200 nucleotides that do not code for protein and are key players in tumorigenesis21. Many lincRNAs are highly tissue and cell-type specific and have been shown to control proliferation and metastasis by their diverse cellular roles including transcriptional regulation, chromatin remodeling, intracellular protein localization, and competitive endogenous RNA activity2122232425. Despite the growing appreciation for lincRNAs in cancer, they have not yet been examined in the context of FLC.
    Recently, several groups have compared gene expression and mutation signatures of FLC tumors with that of adjacent non-tumor liver1011131517. Other studies of specific genes have also revealed differences between FLC and HCC2627282930. However, no study has yet characterized a molecular signature of FLC that distinguishes it from other liver cancers or other non-liver tumor types. Here, we identify six cases of FLC within The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), half of which were originally classified as HCC. Transcriptomic analysis of FLCs reveals a unique messenger RNA (mRNA) and lincRNA signature of FLC. We confirm this signature in two independent validation cohorts of 20 and 34 FLC tumors. Most of the genes, and all of the lincRNAs, of the signature have not previously been specifically highlighted as markers of FLC, and therefore represent both novel markers and candidate oncogenes of FLC. A key finding is that many genes and lincRNAs in the FLC signature, including LINC00473, point to the likely importance of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-mediated PKA signaling in shaping FLC gene expression. We perform additional experimental validation for one member of the mRNA signature, carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12), which may have tumor and/or metastasis promoting functions. This work motivates future experimental investigation to determine the role of FLC signature genes and lincRNAs, as well as DNAJB1-PRKACA, in FLC pathogenesis.
    
      Results
      
        Identification of FLC cases in TCGA
        The fusion transcript DNAJB1-PRKACA is thought to be present in almost all FLC cases1117, but thus far has not been detected in any other type of liver cancer, leading to the hypothesis that DNAJB1-PRKACA is specific to FLC20. To evaluate this hypothesis, we analyzed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data from 9158 tumor and 692 non-tumor samples across 29 different cancer types in TCGA (Supplementary Table S1). We detected robust evidence for expression of DNAJB1-PRKACA in six samples, all of which were tumors classified as Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (LIHC, Fig. 1a). Interestingly, three of these samples were subannotated as FLC, whereas the other three were subannotated as HCC. To validate the fusion in each of the samples, we confirmed the presence of the heterozygous ~400 kb deletion by analysis of whole exome sequencing (WES) data, single nucleotide polymorphism microarray (SNP array) data, or both (Supplementary Fig. S1). The three samples subannotated as HCC could be indicative of non-FLC tumors expressing DNAJB1-PRKACA (which has not been observed previously) or FLC tumors that were misannotated as HCCs (which was not uncommon historically). To distinguish between these two possibilities, we examined additional data sources available through TCGA for all six tumors expressing the chimera.
        We first examined histology slides available for the six tumors expressing DNAJB1-PRKACA. Two liver pathologists (KGG, MST) independently reviewed all histology slides. The three samples annotated as FLC (TCGA-DD-A4NB, TCGA-RC-A6M5, TCGA-MR-A8JO) all showed classical features of this tumor type including lamellar bands of fibrosis, eosinophilic cytoplasm, large nuclei, and prominent nucleoli. Of the three samples annotated as HCC, one displayed classical histological features of FLC (Fig. 1b, TCGA-5R-AA1D), while the other two exhibited histological features of both FLC and HCC (Fig. 1b, TCGA-RC-A6M3, TCGA-DD-A1EC). The percentage of reads overlapping the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion junction and the percentage of paired reads encompassing the entire junction were not significantly different in the samples with classical FLC histology compared to those with characteristics of both FLC and HCC morphology (Supplementary Fig. S1).
        Due to the lack of access to the original tissues, we were not able to perform additional diagnostic staining of FLC protein markers (e.g., CD68, CK7) in order to further characterize the mixed FLC-HCC samples. However, we did analyze the expression of previously reported FLC RNA markers, PCSK1131415 and AGR227, and found that together they do differentiate the six DNAJB1-PRKACA expression tumors from all HCC and CCA samples (Supplementary Fig. S2).
        We next examined the ages of the patients from which these six tumors were resected. The mean ages at diagnosis for annotated FLC and misannotated HCC patients were 26.33 (range of 20–34) and 20.33 (range of 17–24), respectively, both of which are consistent with the age of onset for FLC and significantly lower than that of HCC and CCA (Fig. 1c, Supplementary Fig. S1). Taken together with our histological and RNA marker analyses, we conclude that all six tumor samples expressing DNAJB1-PRKACA display features consistent with FLC. We refer to these six as FLC going forward.
      
      
        Identification of differentially expressed genes in FLC compared to HCC and CCA
        To determine if the gene expression profiles of FLCs differ from that of other liver cancers, we performed hierarchical clustering of FLC (n = 6), HCC (n = 263), and CCA (n = 36) samples with TCGA RNA-seq data using the 10,000 most variable genes across all samples. Our analysis revealed that the six FLCs clustered together in a clade separate from all HCCs and CCAs (Fig. 2a), indicating that FLCs have a unique gene expression profile distinct from other liver cancers. Importantly, all six FLC tumors were sequenced in separate batches. This finding held true with the addition of non-tumor liver (n = 50) and cholangiocyte (n = 9) samples to the analysis (Supplementary Fig. S3). It is important to note that FLC tumor purity3132 was well within the range observed for HCC (Supplemental Fig. S4), indicating that tumor purity alone cannot account for the clustering of FLC samples.
        Next we sought to identify the genes significantly differentially expressed between FLC and both HCC and CCA. Genes were considered in the analysis if they had an average normalized count ≥50 in at least one tumor type, and were defined as differentially expressed if they exhibited >2 fold-difference in average expression level and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 between FLC and both HCC and CCA. We found 444 differentially expressed genes between FLC and HCC and 1509 between FLC and CCA. Of these, 163 were differentially expressed between FLC and both HCC and CCA with concordant directionality (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table S2). As expected, hierarchical clustering of FLC, HCC, and CCA samples based on the expression of these 163 genes resulted in a dendrogram with a clade containing only the six FLC samples (Supplementary Fig. S5). Moreover, principal component analysis showed that these 163 genes distinguish FLC from each of 20 other non-liver cancer types for which gene expression data is available through TCGA (Supplementary Fig. S6), although there are some notable exceptions of specific papillary renal cell carcinoma tumor samples that cluster closely with the FLC cases (Supplementary Fig. S6i).
        Gene ontology analysis of these 163 genes revealed a significant enrichment in transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity and growth factor binding (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, kinase enrichment analysis revealed that the 163 genes are most significantly over-represented for substrates of PRKACA, supporting the notion that wild-type PKA and/or DNAJB1-PRKACA may be critical to the etiology and molecular characteristics of FLC (Fig. 2d).
      
      
        Determination of an FLC mRNA signature
        We next sought to determine which among the 163 genes are most unique to FLC compared to HCC and CCA. Therefore, we identified the genes whose expression levels in all FLC samples are greater or less than 95% of all HCC and CCA samples. This analysis resulted in a set of 16 genes, which we refer to as the FLC mRNA signature (Fig. 3). All 16 of these genes are up-regulated in FLC and also distinguish FLC tumors from non-malignant liver and non-malignant cholangiocytes (Fig. 3). We validated this FLC gene signature in two independent cohorts of FLC cases. Using RNA-seq data for 20 FLC tumors from Honeyman et al.17 we confirmed that 14 out of the 16 genes (except CREB3L1 and ITPRIP) are indeed significantly elevated in FLC relative to HCC and CCA (Supplementary Fig. S7). Analysis of microarray data for 34 FLC tumors from Cornella et al.11 demonstrated that most of these genes were significantly elevated in FLC compared to non-malignant liver tissue (Supplementary Fig. S8). Further analysis of the Cornella et al. dataset, in which the authors had provided evidence for three different FLC subtypes11, showed that several genes (e.g., CA12, NOVA1, PCSK1, TMEM163, and TNRC6C) are significantly elevated in FLC irrespective of the subtype (Supplementary Fig. S9).
        CK7 and CD68 are currently used as protein markers to diagnose FLC3. However, CK7 protein is expressed in approximately 1/3 of conventional HCCs33 and CD68 is routinely expressed in macrophages located within the sinusoids of conventional HCCs34. In fact, our analysis shows that at least at the RNA level, many HCCs and CCAs express both CD68 and CK7 at levels observed in FLCs (Supplementary Fig. S10). Furthermore, many other current and proposed markers of FLC313141526273035 do not seem to effectively distinguish between FLC and other liver cancers (Supplementary Fig. S11). Two genes in the 16-gene signature, protein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1) and p21-activated kinase 3 (PAK3), were previously described as elevated in FLC by multiple studies131415. Both PCSK136 and PAK337 have been reported as markers of neuroendocrine tumors and FLC tumors have been shown to display neuroendocrine characteristics1314. However, notably, 14 out of the 16 genes in the signature have not been linked etiologically to FLC or specifically highlighted previously as biomarkers of FLC relative to other tumor types.
      
      
        Analysis of the FLC mRNA signature across non-liver tumor types
        We next sought to determine if these 16 genes could also distinguish FLC from other non-liver cancers. We found by analysis of RNA-seq data in TCGA, for 7211 tumor samples across 20 non-liver cancer types with available non-tumor tissue data (Supplementary Table S3), that 14 of the 16 genes are up-regulated to a greater extent in FLC relative to the corresponding adjacent non-malignant tissue than in any other tumor type (Fig. 4a). Also, among these 14 genes, eight are more abundant in FLC than in any other tumor type (Fig. 4a), indicating that these eight genes not only distinguish FLC from other liver tumors, but also likely uniquely mark FLC. These eight genes include ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) and solute carrier family 16 member 14 (SLC16A14), which are on average 6.4 and 7.0 fold more highly expressed in FLC, respectively, than the tumor type with the next highest expression. Six of the 14 genes are not uniquely elevated in FLC, such as neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 (NOVA1) and carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12), but several of these have been described as candidate oncogenes in the context of other cancers. For example, NOVA1 overexpression leads to invasion and proliferation in HCC cell lines and is correlated with poor prognosis in HCC patients38. CA12 regulates extracellular pH and is overexpressed in a subset of renal cell carcinomas and breast tumors3940. Additionally, inhibition of CA12 and other carbonic anhydrase family members has been proposed as a cancer therapeutic414243.
        We also evaluated by RNA-seq the expression of the 16 genes in our previously described patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of FLC, which is currently the only FLC disease model available, as well as in normal cells of four different maturational lineage stages of the liver: biliary tree stem cells (BTSC), hepatic stem cells (HpSC), hepatoblasts (HB), and adult hepatocytes (AHEP). We found that 15 of the 16 are dramatically up-regulated in the FLC PDX model compared to all of the other liver lineage stages, including BTSCs (Fig. 4b). Our previous work has suggested that BTSCs may be the cell type of origin for FLC tumors16. The finding that most genes in our FLC mRNA signature are elevated in the FLC PDX model compared to BTSCs suggests that they may also play a functional role in FLC pathogenesis.
      
      
        Identification of differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs in FLC compared to HCC and CCA
        LincRNAs play an important role in the biology of a wide array of different tumor types21, but have never previously been characterized in FLC. To determine if the lincRNA expression profile of FLCs differs from that of other liver cancers, we performed hierarchical clustering of FLC (n = 6), HCC (n = 263), and CCA (n = 36) samples with TCGA RNA-seq data using the 500 most variable lincRNAs across all samples. Our analysis revealed that the six FLCs clustered together in a clade separate from all HCCs and CCAs (Fig. 5a), indicating that FLCs have a unique lincRNA expression profile distinct from other liver cancers.
        To identify specific lincRNAs that are differentially expressed in FLC compared to both HCC and CCA, we performed differential lincRNA expression analyses using DESeq. LincRNAs were defined as differentially expressed if they exhibited >2 fold-difference in average expression level and FDR < 0.05 between FLC and both HCC and CCA. We found five differentially expressed lincRNAs between FLC and HCC and 47 between FLC and CCA. Of these, 4 were differentially expressed between FLC and both HCC and CCA with concordant directionality (Fig. 5b, Supplementary Table S4).
      
      
        Determination of an FLC lincRNA signature
        We next sought to determine which among the 4 lincRNAs are most unique to FLC compared to HCC and CCA. Therefore, we identified the lincRNAs whose expression levels in all FLC samples are greater or less than 95% of all HCC and CCA samples. This analysis identified one lincRNA, RP11-157N3.1. When we relaxed the threshold from 95% to 90%, we identified a total of three lincRNAs (AF064858.6, LINC00313, RP11-157N3.1), which we refer to as the lincRNA signature (Fig. 5c). The robust up-regulation of these three lincRNAs in FLC relative to HCC was validated using an independent database of quantified lincRNAs called The Atlas of Non-coding RNAs in Cancer (TANRIC) (Supplementary Fig. S12). Interestingly, LINC00313 was previously annotated as the potential protein-coding gene C21orf84 and was identified as differentially expressed between FLC and both HCC and CCA in the mRNA analysis above (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table S2). Additionally, we noticed that while another lincRNA, LINC00473, missed the threshold for significance, it was nevertheless notably overexpressed in FLC (Fig. 5c). LINC00473 (previously annotated as C6orf176) has been linked to cAMP-mediated gene regulation444546. Since FLCs express a recurrent fusion protein containing the catalytic subunit of PKA and PKA is a cAMP-dependent protein kinase, LINC00473 may serve as a marker of aberrant cAMP levels or as a downstream effector of cAMP-mediated mechanisms.
      
      
        Analysis of the FLC lincRNA signature across non-liver tumor types
        We next sought to determine if these four lincRNAs could also distinguish FLC from other non-liver cancers. We found by analysis of data in the TANRIC database that all four of the lincRNAs are up-regulated to a greater extent in FLC relative to the corresponding adjacent non-malignant tissue than in any other tumor type (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, all four are more abundant in FLC than in any other tumor type (Fig. 5d), suggesting that these lincRNAs not only distinguish FLC from other liver tumors, but are also likely unique to FLC. Finally, we also evaluated by RNA-seq the expression of the four lincRNAs in the FLC PDX model as well as in each of the four different maturational lineage stages of the liver mentioned above. Only the levels of LINC00313 and LINC00473 were significantly elevated in the FLC PDX model (Fig. 5e).
      
      
        Validation of CA12 overexpression in FLC
        Lastly, we aimed to provide comprehensive validation of one of the genes in the FLC signature. We selected CA12 for four reasons. First, CA12 upregulation has already been associated with other highly aggressive cancers, most notably specific subtypes of renal cell carcinoma and breast cancer3940. Second, CA12 regulates extracellular pH, which plays a role in important cancer processes including invasion and metastasis. Third, consistent with the known functions of CA12, we observed substantially greater mRNA levels of CA12 in metastatic FLC tumors compared to primary FLC tumors in an independent dataset17 (Fig. 6a). Fourth, PKA has been shown to phosphorylate CA9, a carbonic anhydrase in the same family as CA12 with similar function and cellular localization47. Phosphorylation of CA9 modulates its activity, implicating PKA in tumor invasion in part by regulation of carbonic anhydrases and extracellular pH.
        We first validated overexpression of CA12 in our FLC PDX model at the RNA and protein level compared to Huh7 cells, a human HCC cell line. RT-qPCR and western blot analyses showed significant upregulation of CA12 RNA and protein expression, respectively, in FLC cells (Fig. 5b,c). Importantly, RT-qPCR detected the expression of DNAJB1-PRKACA transcripts in our FLC PDX model, but not in Huh7 cells (Supplementary Fig. S13). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of cells from our FLC PDX model grown as spheroids and FLC xenografts showed dramatic upregulation of CA12 compared to normal liver (Fig. 5d). Additional IHC staining of primary samples revealed positive signal for CA12 in 12/12 FLC cases, but only 4/14 HCC tumors, and 0/5 normal liver samples (Fig. 5e,f).
      
    
    
      Discussion
      FLC is a rare liver cancer that primarily affects adolescents and young adults1. Previous genomic studies have primarily compared FLC tumors to adjacent non-tumor tissue1011131517. However, global transcriptomic comparisons of FLC to multiple other liver cancers, or other non-liver tumor types, have not been examined. Here, through RNA-seq analyses of protein coding genes and lincRNAs in FLC, HCC, and CCA, as well as >25 other tumor types, we identify a unique mRNA and lincRNA signature and candidate oncogenes in FLC.
      Recently, multiple studies have confirmed the presence of a fusion transcript, DNAJB1-PRKACA, in FLC tumor samples11131617. This fusion has been proposed to be specific to FLC20. Examining nearly 10,000 samples, we have performed the most extensive analysis evaluating this hypothesis and find that DNAJB1-PRKACA is indeed specific to FLC tumors. This finding motivates further implementation of FLC diagnostics testing for the presence of this unique fusion. Although DNAJB1-PRKACA is present in the majority of FLC tumors, one group recently reported FLC tumors lacking the chimera11. It remains unclear if these tumors really lack the chimera, if the chimera is expressed at lower levels, or if these tumors are misclassified. If there is indeed a minority of FLC tumors without the fusion, further work is necessary to determine whether these cancers resemble the majority of FLC tumors at the transcriptomic level.
      In our analyses, we detected robust evidence of DNAJB1-PRKACA expression in six tumor samples all classified as Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Interestingly, three samples were subannotated as FLC, while three were subannotated as HCC. For these six samples, we confirmed the presence of the chromosome 19 deletion that results in the fusion transcript through WES or SNP array. The ages of all six patients (17–34) were also consistent with those previously reported for FLC patients (Supplementary Fig. S1). Evaluation of the single histology slide available for each tumor demonstrated that four tumors (three subannotated as FLC and one subannotated as HCC) displayed classical FLC histology, while two tumors (both subannotated as HCC) displayed histological features of both FLC and HCC. Unfortunately, without access to these samples or additional histological images, we were unable to perform diagnostic stains or evaluation to further confirm the FLC diagnosis. Importantly, both samples with and without classical FLC histology showed similar evidence for the presence of the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript.
      FLC tumors with regions of histology resembling HCC have previously been identified. Notably, in one case fluorescent in situ hybridization identified genomic PRKACA rearrangements throughout the tumor including the regions with HCC histology20. Previous work has also demonstrated that FLCs with classical histology have distinct gene expression signatures than FLCs with mixed histology14. While our results demonstrate that all six FLCs shared similar gene expression profiles, we did notice that the two FLC tumors with mixed histology consistently clustered together (data not shown), confirming the previous findings. While FLCs with mixed histological features have been previously described1420, more work is necessary to determine whether these are truly distinct etiologically from FLCs with classical histology.
      We identified 163 genes using DESeq that were differentially expressed in FLC compared to both HCC and CCA (Fig. 2b). These genes also distinguished FLC from 20 additional non-liver tumors (Supplementary Fig. S6). However, it is worth noting that we did identify a small subset of papillary renal cell carcinoma (KIRP) samples that displayed similar gene expression signatures to FLC and were enriched for type 2 KIRP tumors48. Interestingly, type 2 KIRP tumors are highly aggressive like FLC and also share some very similar histological features with FLC including large cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli48. Gene ontology analysis of these genes revealed enrichment of multiple types of kinase activity and growth factor binding (Fig. 2c). Additionally, we performed kinase enrichment analysis49, which identifies enrichment for substrates, curated from multiple kinase-substrate resources, in a given gene set. Kinase enrichment analysis of these 163 genes demonstrated enrichment of PRKACA substrates (Fig. 2d) suggesting that PKA activity, likely though the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion, distinguishes FLC from both HCC and CCA. Within this set of 163 genes, we identified 16 genes that most uniquely distinguished FLC from other liver cancers that we refer to as the FLC mRNA signature (Fig. 3). Notably, only 2 of the genes in the mRNA signature, PCSK1 and PAK3, have been previously described as markers of FLC131415.
      Apart from PCSK1 and PAK3, none of the remaining 14 genes have been explicitly linked to FLC. However, some of these have been shown to play important biological functions in other cancers. For example, NOVA1 encodes for a RNA-binding protein that is associated with poor overall survival and increased recurrence in HCC patients. Overexpression of NOVA1 also increases HCC proliferation, invasion, and migration38. CA12 codes for a carbonic anhydrase responsible for regulating extracellular pH and is elevated in certain subsets of renal cell carcinoma and breast cancers3940. Inhibition of CA12 enzymatic activity has also been proposed as a therapeutic strategy for breast cancer414243. Additionally, some of the remaining genes in the FLC mRNA signature including, TMEM163, TNRC6C, and C10orf128 have yet to be extensively characterized in cancer. Future studies will be necessary to determine if they play a functional role in FLC biology.
      We evaluated the expression of the 16 genes in the mRNA signature in 20 non-liver tumor types within TCGA and found that 14 of the 16 genes are more up-regulated in FLC relative to the corresponding adjacent non-malignant tissue than in any other tumor type (Fig. 4a). Among these 14 genes, eight are more abundant in FLC than in any other tumor type, demonstrating that these eight genes not only distinguish FLC from other liver tumors, but also likely uniquely mark FLC. Among these eight genes are OAT and SLC16A14. OAT, ornithine aminotransferase, is a mitochondrial protein that catalyzes the reversible formation of proline from ornithine. OAT is positively regulated by β-catenin and cAMP and inhibition of OAT in HCC suppresses proliferation505152. SLC16A14 is a poorly characterized monocarboxylate transporter suggested to play a role in resistance to chemotherapy in ovarian cancer53.
      Our previous work has demonstrated that FLCs are most similar to biliary tree stem cells (BTSCs) compared to three other maturational lineage stages of the liver based on gene expression profile16. These results suggest that BTSCs may be the cell type of origin for FLC tumors. Interestingly, FLC tumors do not cluster with cholangiocarcinomas (Fig. 2a), which are commonly thought to derive from normal biliary cells. Examination of the 16 genes in the mRNA signature in a unique FLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model and these four different lineage stages of the liver, including BTSCs, demonstrated upregulation of 15 genes in FLC compared to all other lineage stages (Fig. 4b).
      Non-coding RNAs play a major role in many biological processes, including cancer initiation and progression2124. However, non-coding RNAs have yet to be explored in the context of FLC. We decided to focus on long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs), which have been shown to be important in proliferation and metastasis. Hierarchical clustering of FLC, HCC, and CCA samples based on the 500 most variable lincRNAs demonstrated that FLCs share a distinct lincRNA expression profile compared to other liver cancers (Fig. 5a). We identified four lincRNAs that were differentially expressed between FLC and both HCC and CCA (Fig. 5b) and found that three of these were more highly expressed in all FLC samples than 90% of the HCC and CCA samples (Fig. 5c). Additionally, we identified one lincRNA, LINC00473, which missed the significance threshold, but was still overexpressed in FLC. We refer to these four as the FLC lincRNA signature. Interestingly, LINC00473 expression is positively regulated by cAMP through PKA and has been suggested as a biomarker of deregulated cAMP signaling4445. Very recently it was shown in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that LINC00473 is regulated by PKA/CREB, correlates with poor prognosis, and is required for tumor growth and survival. Our analysis confirms that LINC00473 is highly expressed in NSCLC; however, remarkably, the levels are 3-fold higher in FLC. These data indicate that the possibility of a mechanistic role for LINC00473 in FLC pathogenesis merits further investigation. The four lincRNAs in the signature also are more abundant in FLC than in multiple non-liver tumors as well as more overexpressed compared to adjacent non-tumor tissue in FLC than other tumor types (Fig. 5d). Evaluation of the lincRNA signature demonstrated overexpression of two lincRNAs, LINC00313 and LINC00473, in FLC compared to four lineage stages of the liver, including BTSCs, suggesting these two lincRNAs may play a role in FLC pathogenesis (Fig. 5e).
      Finally, we validated overexpression of one gene in the FLC mRNA signature, CA12. At both the RNA and protein level, CA12 was upregulated in FLC compared to HCC and normal liver (Fig. 5). Interestingly, we also observed high CA12 expression in metastatic FLC tumors, consistent with previous reports suggesting that CA12 and extracellular pH play an important role in metastasis40.
      We have identified a signature of protein-coding genes and lincRNAs that distinguish FLC from ~22 other liver and non-liver cancers. Additional analysis has revealed that these genes are upregulated in FLCs compared to BTSCs, the potential FLC cell type of origin, suggesting that many of these genes may play a role in FLC pathogenesis. Functional evaluation of these genes will be necessary to dissect their role(s) in FLC. These genes also provide additional confirmatory evidence for the diagnosis of FLC. Whether these genes are upregulated in FLC independent of the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion or as a result of it remains uncertain. In either situation, these genes may act to promote development and/or progression of FLC. If there do exist true FLCs lacking the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion, it remains unclear if these genes are also upregulated in these tumors.
      Overall, our results point to dysregulation of cAMP/PKA signaling as a major force shaping the gene expression landscape in FLC and also reveal additional genes that may play an important role in FLC etiology. Functional validation of the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion and genes in the mRNA and lincRNA signature in the context of FLC may reveal novel therapeutic targets of this rare and deadly cancer.
    
    
      Materials and Methods
      
        RNA expression analysis
        RNA-seq data for TCGA fusion (9840 samples—9148 tumor and 691 non-tumor samples—across 29 annotated tumor types, Supplementary Table S1) and differential gene expression analysis (263 HCC, 6 FLC (both HCC and FLC are annotated as LIHC within TCGA), 50 non-tumor liver, 36 CCA, 9 non-tumor bile duct/cholangiocytes) were downloaded from the Cancer Genomics Hub (CGHub). RNA-seq data for one FLC validation cohort (20 FLC, 9 non-malignant liver)17 were downloaded from the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP, study accession phs000709.v1.p1). Microarray data for a second FLC validation cohort (34 FLC, 5 non-malignant liver)11 were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, GSE57725). RNA-seq data for the FLC PDX (patient-derived xenograft) model and liver lineages were previously described16 and are available on GEO (GSE73114). Normalized (quartile normalization) data for gene expression analysis across 20 non-liver tumors, LIHC, and CCA (8302 samples—7621 tumor and 681 non-tumor samples, Supplementary Table S3) were obtained from the TCGA Data Portal. Normalized (RPKM) data for lincRNA expression analysis across 13 non-liver tumors and LIHC (5367 samples—4803 tumor and 564 non-tumor samples, Supplementary Table S5) were obtained from The Atlas of non-coding RNA in cancer (TANRIC)54. Quality of FASTQ files was assessed using FastQC and reads were aligned to the human hg19 genome with MapSplice255. Transcripts were quantified using RSEM56 with 2011 UCSC Known Gene definitions for protein-coding genes and GENCODE release 19 for lincRNAs. Normalization and differential expression analysis for RNA-seq were performed using DESeq57. Genes were classified as differentially expressed if they met the following criteria: fold change ≥2, false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05, and >50 normalized counts in at least one tissue type. LincRNAs were classified as differentially expressed if they met the following criteria: fold change ≥2 and FDR < 0.05. Hierarchical clustering was performed in R using Euclidean distance and Ward’s minimum variance method following Variance Stabilizing Transformation provided by DESeq. Gene ontology and kinase enrichment analysis49 was performed using Enrichr58. Differential expression for microarray data was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test.
      
      
        Copy number variation analysis
        For whole exome sequencing analysis, 10 kb bin counts data were generated using BEDTools. The read ratios were calculated by using the count in tumor divided by the count in matched normal for each bin. A circular binary segmentation59 procedure with default parameters was applied to segment the genome. For SNP array analysis, publically available level 3 segmented copy number data for all TCGA LIHC Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays were downloaded through the Broad Institute’s TCGA GDAC Firehose data portal (http://gdac.broadinstitute.org/). We filtered for segments that included a copy number alteration on chromosome 19. Samples with a deletion at chr19:14239803-14624494 were identified by having a segment annotation (i.e. segment start and segment stop genomic position) that completely encompasses chr19:14239803-14624494 and that also have a segment mean less than or equal to −0.1.
      
      
        Histology and patient ages
        Histology images were accessed from the TCGA Data Portal and from the Cancer Digital Slide Archive60. Liver histology was reviewed independently by two gastrointestinal pathologists (KGG, MST). Ages of patients were obtained from TCGA using the R package TCGA2STAT61.
      
      
        Cells
        Cells from the patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of FLC were grown in NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ or NOD scid gamma (NSG) immunocompromised mice, isolated, and cultured as previously described16. Procedures were performed according to protocols approved by the UNC School of Medicine at Chapel Hill IACUC. The mice were housed in UNC’s DLAM sterile facility in micro-isolated autoclaved cages with free access to autoclaved water and radiation sterilized food. Huh7 cells were obtained and cultured as previously described62.
      
      
        Primary samples
        12 FFPE fibrolamellar carcinomas, 14 hepatocellular carcinomas, and 3 non-malignant livers were collected from the Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN) institutional clinical archives. 2 additional non-malignant livers were obtained from human donors. The FLC samples were previously shown to harbor DNAJB1-PRKACA transcripts by qRT-PCR and were positive for a PRKACA rearrangement by FISH20. We have characterized these cases as morphologically typical fibrolamellar carcinomas and they were previously part of another study, which showed that FGFR1 was not amplified in fibrolamellar carcinoma63.
      
      
        Quantitative real-time PCR
        qRT-PCR was carried out as described previously6264. Briefly, total RNA was extracted using the Total RNA Purification Kit (Norgen Biotek, Thorold, Ontario, Canada). Reverse Transcription was performed using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA). Gene expression was quantified with using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Thermo Fischer Scientific) on a CFX96 Touch Real-Time System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Assays were performed in triplicate. CA12 and DNAJB1-PRKACA mRNA expression levels were normalized to the housekeeping gene, RPS9. CA12 fold increase was calculated based on the 2−ΔΔCT method in comparison to Huh7 cells, a human HCC cell line. The Taqman assays used were CA12 (Assay ID Hs01080902_m1) and DNAJB1-PRKACA (custom assay, F: CGCAAGCGCGAGATCTTC, R: GAAAATCTTCTTTGGCTTTGGCTAAGA, Probe: CTTTCACTTCCTCCCCGTAGCG).
      
      
        Western blotting
        Huh7 cells and FLC PDX spheroids were lysed in lysis buffer (RIPA buffer (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 25x Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma), 100x Pierce Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, β-mercaptoethanol, 1 M dithiothreitol) at 4 °C. All lysates were flash frozen, thawed, and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000 × g at 4 °C. Protein concentration was quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were diluted 1:1 in Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad) containing 5% β-mercaptoethanol, heated at 95 °C for 3 minutes, loaded into 12% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gel (Bio-Rad), and run in 1X Tris/Glycine/SDS buffer (Bio-Rad) for 75 minutes at 150 V. Transfer was performed with the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked with either 4% milk or bovine serum albumin (BSA), probed with primary mouse anti-CA12 (1:500, ab140385, Abcam, Cambridge, MA) or rabbit anti-vinculin (1:1000, #4650, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), and then incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies. Membranes were incubated in ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection System (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) for 5 minutes before visualization.
      
      
        Immunohistochemistry
        FLC xenograft tissue, FLC PDX spheroids, and non-malignant liver (n = 2) were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight and stored in 70% ethanol. Samples were paraffin embedded, cut into 5 μm sections, and deparaffinized. Antigen retrieval was performed by steaming tissue sections in 1x sodium citrate buffer, Citrate Plus (ScyTec, West Logan, UT) for 20 minutes. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked using 3% hydrogen peroxide diluted in TBS for 15 minutes at room temperature. Endogenous biotin activity was blocked using 2.5% Normal Horse Serum Blocking Solution (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) for 1 hour at room temperature. Sections were incubated in primary mouse anti-CA12 (1:75, ab140385, Abcam), diluted in TBS, overnight at 4 °C. Sections were then incubated in secondary antibody, ImmPRESS™ REAGENT Anti-mouse Ig (Vector Laboratories, #MP-7402) at room temperature for 30 minutes. Chromogen staining was performed using ImmPACT DAB Peroxidase Kit (Vector Laboratories, #SK-4105). Sections were lightly counterstained using hematoxylin, dehydrated, mounted in xylene, and visualized. For primary FLC, primary HCC, and non-malignant liver (n = 3) samples, tissue sectioning and IHC staining was performed at the Pathology Research Core (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN) using the Leica Bond RX stainer (Leica, Buffalo, IL). Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) tissues were sectioned at 5 microns. The tissue slides were dewaxed and retrieved on-line using the following reagents: Bond Dewax (Leica) and Epitope Retrieval 2 (EDTA; Leica). Tissue slides were retrieved for 20 minutes. The primary mouse anti-CA12 (ab140385, Abcam) was used at 1:500 and it was incubated for 15 minutes. The detection system used was Polymer Refine Detection System (Leica). This system includes the hydrogen peroxidase block, secondary antibody polymer, DAB, and Hematoxylin. Once completed, slides were removed from the stainer and rinsed for 5 minutes in tap water. Slides were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethyl alcohol and xylene prior to permanent coverslipping in xylene based media.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Dinh, T. A. et al. Comprehensive analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas reveals a unique gene and non-coding RNA signature of fibrolamellar carcinoma. Sci. Rep.
7, 44653; doi: 10.1038/srep44653 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Information
        
        
      
    
  
        Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a serious obstacle to efficient cancer treatment. Overexpression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) plays a significant role in MDR. Recent studies proved that targeting cellular metabolism could sensitize MDR cells. In addition, metabolic alterations could affect the extracellular vesicles (EVs) cargo and release. This study aimed to: i) identify metabolic alterations in P-gp overexpressing cells that could be involved in the development of MDR and, ii) identify a potential role for the EVs in the acquisition of the MDR. Two different pairs of MDR and their drug-sensitive counterpart cancer cell lines were used. Our results showed that MDR (P-gp overexpressing) cells have a different metabolic profile from their drug-sensitive counterparts, demonstrating decreases in the pentose phosphate pathway and oxidative phosphorylation rate; increases in glutathione metabolism and glycolysis; and alterations in the methionine/S-adenosylmethionine pathway. Remarkably, EVs from MDR cells were capable of stimulating a metabolic switch in the drug-sensitive cancer cells, towards a MDR phenotype. In conclusion, obtained results contribute to the growing knowledge about metabolic alterations in MDR cells and the role of EVs in the intercellular transfer of MDR. The specific metabolic alterations identified in this study may be further developed as targets for overcoming MDR.
      
    The development of multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer is a serious impediment to treatment success. MDR is defined as a phenotype of the cells resistant to multiple structurally and functionally different drugs. Such resistance is multifactorial and may be due to various mechanisms12. There are several important mechanisms involved in MDR whose identification has generated valuable information on how to circumvent MDR and improve chemotherapy treatment.
    One of the most important known mechanism is the overexpression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, commonly known as drug efflux pumps, such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp)2, which is frequently overexpressed in cancer3. P-gp transports drug-substrates across the cell membrane, thus decreasing their intracellular concentrations to sub-lethal4.
    Several studies pointed to a relation between MDR and alterations in cellular metabolism: (i) upregulation of hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF-1) was shown to be associated with chemoresistance5; (ii) leukemia models with higher glycolytic rates were resistant to glucocorticoids6; (iii) modulation of cellular metabolic pathways was demonstrated to contribute to acquired resistance in multiple myeloma cells7; (iv) glycolytic pyruvate was capable of regulating P-gp expression in multicellular tumor spheroids8; and (v) hypoxia was shown to induceMDR and glycolysis in an orthotopic MDR tumor model in nude mice9. Ultimatelly, these studies may contribute to understanding how MDR could be circumvented by application of specific metabolic modulators and inhibitors. Therefore, it is important to identify metabolic alterations in MDR cancer cells, which could lead to the identification of new metabolic molecular targets to circumvent MDR in cancer.
    The formation of Extracellular vesicles (EVs) and their release have been implicated in pathological processes such as cancer101112 and shown to be relevant for the intercellular transfer of a drug-resistant phenotype121314. Indeed, drug-sensitive cancer cells can become drug-resistant following intracellular incorporation of EVs shed by drug-resistant cancer cells13141516. We have previously shown that the EVs population shed by MDR cells is different from the one shed by drug-sensitive counterpart cells, thus suggesting that MDR cells produce more microvesicles and less exosomes than their drug-sensitive counterpart cells17. In addition, several studies have stated that metabolic alterations in cancer cells could induce alterations in the EVs’ cargo and its release181920. So far, it is unclear if these metabolic alterations are caused by or could be responsible for the MDR phenotype.
    Here we provide evidence that MDR cancer cell lines (overexpressing P-gp) acquired a different metabolic profile from their drug-sensitive counterpart cells and that the EVs released by MDR cells caused a metabolic switch towards the MDR phenotype in the recipient cells.
    
      Results
      
        Protein profiling and bioinformatics analysis of MDR and drug-sensitive counterpart cell lines identified differentially expressed proteins (DEPs)
        For protein profiling, each of the four biological replicates of each condition was run by LC–MS. The data was transferred to Progenesis QI for proteomics to compare drug-sensitive cancer cells (K562 and NCI-H460) with their MDR counterparts (K562Dox and NCI-H460/R). Individual comparisons were carried out for each pair of cell lines: K562 versus K562Dox and NCI-H460 versus NCI-H460/R. Following Progenesis LC–MS analysis, peptide features with ANOVA < 0.05 and 1+, 2+ and 3+ charge states were subjected to MASCOT database searching. The MASCOT mgf files were then resubmitted to the Progenesis software to yield a list of identified proteins. These lists were further interrogated to exclude proteins with less than 2 peptides matched, a fold change <1.5 and not statistically significant.
        A total of 91 significant (p < 0.05) differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified when comparing the K562 vs. K562Dox cells and 67 significant DEPs (p < 0.05) were identified when comparing the NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R cells. A full list of the DEPs identified for each cell line is available in the Supplementary Information (Tables S1 and S2).
      
      
        Gene Ontology (GO) bioinformatics analysis indicated that the greatest difference between MDR cells and their drug-sensitive counterparts occurred in metabolic processes
        Using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) network analysis tool, the molecular functions/localizations of the DEPs data sets were analyzed according to GO functional annotations and categories. GO analysis of cellular components, molecular functions and biological processes were performed on the 91 DEPs (K562 vs. K562Dox) and 67 DEPs (NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R) identified with the Progenesis software. Pie diagrams represent the GO analysis of the identified DEPs (Fig. 1). The GO analysis revealed that most of the DEPs (for both cancer cell models) have cytoplasmic origin (42% in K562 vs. K562Dox and 44% in NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R), cytoskeleton origin (17% for both models) and membrane localization (6% in K562 vs. K562Dox and 5% in NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R) (Fig. 1A). The functional classification of these proteins from both cancer cell models implied that they are mostly involved in catalytic activities, structure molecule activities and protein binding activities (Fig. 1B). Noteworthy, analysis of the biological processes indicated that the greatest difference between the MDR cells and their drug-sensitive counterparts occurred in metabolic processes (50% in K562 vs. K562Dox and 63% in NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R) (Fig. 1C). The remaining different biological processes were associated with transport, development processes and cell organization and biogenesis.
      
      
        KEGG pathway enrichment analysis indicated that the most significant active pathways enriched in the MDR cells were involved in metabolic processes
        Following the identification of the DEPs, the most significant active pathways were analyzed using KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. Results indicated that the most significantly active pathways enriched in the MDR cells were those involved in metabolic processes. The glutathione metabolism (GSH), pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and glycolysis were found to be the most enriched pathways identified in both cancer cell models (Table 1). In the chronic myeloid leukemia model (K562Dox) the following 4 DEPs were found to be involved in the GSH metabolism pathway (G6PD, PRDX2, IDH1 and 6PGD), 3 DEPs in the PPP pathway (G6PD, ALDOC and 6PGD) and 2 DEPs in the glycolysis pathway (ALDOC and PKM2). In the non-small cell lung cancer model the following 5 DEPs were found to be involved in the GSH metabolism pathway (G6PD, PRDX2, IDH1, MGST1 and 6PGD), 4 DEPs in the PPP pathway (G6PD, TALDO1, TKT and 6PGD) and 1 DEP involved in the glycolysis pathway (ALDH3A1) (Table 1).
      
      
        Other DEPs involved in MDR and metabolic processes were identified by bioinformatics analysis
        In addition to the DEPs referred above (Table 1) other DEPs also involved in metabolic process and MDR were analyzed in terms of normalized abundance between MDR and drug-sensitive counterpart cells (for both cancer cell models) (Table 2).
        The DEP with the highest fold change was P-gp, which was upregulated in both MDR cells with a fold change of 18.8 for K562Dox vs. K562 and 64.5 for NCI-H460/R vs. NCI-H460. In terms of metabolic processes, most of the DEPs involved in the PPP pathway were downregulated in the two MDR models (ALDOC, G6PD, 6PGD and TKT) and only TALDO1 was upregulated in the NCI-H460/R cells (Table 2). Regarding GSH metabolism, the enzymes responsible for the NADP+ reduction to NADPH (G6PD, 6PGD and IDH1) were downregulated in the MDR cells but MGST1 was upregulated in NCI-H460/R cells. Regarding glycolysis, ALDOC was downregulated in MDR cells but the enzyme responsible for the pyruvate production (PKM2) was upregulated. Additionally, DEPs involved in the TCA cycle were also identified (ACLY and ACO2). ACLY was upregulated whereas ACO2 was downregulated in the MDR cancer cell models (Table 2).
        Interestingly HYOU1 and NDRG1 (both involved in cellular response to hypoxia) and MTHFD1 (an enzyme involved in the methionine pathway) were upregulated in the MDR cells (Table 2).
      
      
        Results obtained by quantitative label-free proteomic approach were validated by Western blot
        The expression of P-gp, G6PD, 6PGD and IDH1 were further validated by Western blot. We focused the validation on DEPs involved in MDR, glutathione metabolism and pentose phosphate pathway. Consistent with the results obtained with the proteomic analysis, P-gp was found upregulated while G6PD, 6PGD and IDH1 were downregulated in the MDR cells (K562Dox and NCI-H460/R) when compared with their drug-sensitive counterpart cells (K562 and NCI-H460) (Fig. 2).
      
      
        MDR cells presented higher levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) and lower levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
        Since most of the proteins that had been identified as DEPs in MDR cells were related to metabolic processes such as GSH metabolism and PPP, the GSH (one of the main detoxification agents in the cell) and ROS levels were analyzed in both tumor models.
        MDR cells (K562Dox and NCI-H460/R) presented significantly higher levels of GSH when compared to their drug-sensitive counterpart cells (K562 and NCI-H460) (Fig. 3A,B). In agreement with this higher capacity provided by the higher levels of GSH to respond to oxidative stress, MDR cells presented lower levels of ROS when compared to their drug-sensitive counterpart cells ( 3C,D).
      
      
        Changes in methionine/S-adenosylmethionine pathway were identified in the MDR cancer cells
        As we found GSH significantly increased in MDR cells, we were also interested in studying the metabolic pathways involved in the biosynthesis of GSH. The main cellular pathway that generates precursor for the synthesis of GSH corresponds to the methionine/S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) pathway. By UPLC-MS metabolomics21 we have quantified metabolites belonging to this pathway in the MDR and their drug-sensitive counterpart cells (Table 3 and Table S3). Methionine was upregulated in both MDR cancer cells. On the contrary, S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) and spermidine were downregulated in both MDR cancer cell lines (K562Dox and NCI-H460/R) (Table 3). In addition, no alterations in S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) were found in both cancer cell models (Table 3). Some other metabolites were found altered (such as (MTA, dcSAMe, betaine, choline and serine) but in different manners between the two cancer models.
        Furthermore, the methylation index (SAMe/SAH), which represents the methylation capacity of the cells, was higher in MDR cells. In the chronic myeloid leukemia model, K562 cells had a methylation index of 6.97, whereas the methylation index for K562Dox cells was 12.05. In the non-small cell lung cancer model, NCI-H460 cells had a methylation index of 2.43 whereas the methylation index for NCI-H460/R cells was 9.79.
      
      
        MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) showed an increase in the non-glycolytic acidification, glycolysis, glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve
        In order to gain new insights into the metabolic phenotype of MDR cells, the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), which reflects the rate of glycolysis, and the oxygen consumption rate (OCR), which reflects the rate of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), were measured in both MDR and sensitive cancer cells. Measurements were performed in both basal cellular state and after treatments with compounds capable of modulating glycolysis and OXPHOS.
        To analyze the glycolytic function, a glycolysis stress test was performed. The ECAR was measured in cells treated sequentially with: their glucose-free assay media as a control (Fig. 4A, blue line A); then with glucose to allow the cells to enter into glycolysis (Fig. 4A, blue line B); next with olygomycin (an ATP coupler) in order to inhibit ATP synthesis by blocking the proton channel and shifting the energy production to glycolysis (Fig. 4A, blue line C); and finally with 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) which is a glucose analog that inhibits glycolysis through competitive binding to glucose hexokinase (Fig. 4A, blue line D). The resulting data allowed calculating the following parameters: Non-glycolytic acidification (= last rate measurement prior to glucose injection); Glycolysis (= maximum rate measurement before oligomycin injection – last rate measurement before glucose injection); Glycolytic capacity (= maximum rate measurement after oligomycin injection – last rate measurement before glucose injection); Glycolytic reserve (= glycolytic capacity – glycolysis).
        In terms of glycolytic function, the MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) showed a statistically significant increase in the non-glycolytic acidification, glycolysis, glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve, when compared to their drug sensitive counterpart cells (NCI-H460) (Fig.4A).
        To analyze the mitochondrial respiration, a mitochondrial stress test was performed. The OCR was measured during cells’ treatment with: corresponding assay media (Fig. 4B, blue line A); then with olygomycin (Fig. 4B, blue line B); next with FCCP (electron transporter chain accelerator) that is an uncoupling agent which disrupts ATP synthesis leading to the collapse of the mitochondrial membrane potential and causing rapid consumption of energy and oxygen without the generation of ATP (Fig. 4B, blue line C); and finally with rotenone (complex I inhibitor) which shuts down mitochondrial respiration by preventing the transfer of electrons from complex I to coenzyme Q (Fig. 4B, blue line D). These modulators allowed to calculate the following parameters: Non-mitochondrial respiration (= minimum rate measurement after rotenone injection); Basal respiration (= last rate measurement before first injection - non-mitochondrial respiration rate); Maximal respiration (= maximum rate measurement after FCCP injection – non-mitochondrial respiration); Proton leak (= minimum rate measurement after olygomycin injection – non-mitochondrial respiration); ATP production (= last rate measurement before olygomycin injection – minimum rate measurement after olygomycin injection); Spare capacity (= maximal respiration – basal respiration).
        Regarding the mitochondrial respiration, the MDR cells showed a statistically significant decrease in the non-mitochondrial respiration, basal respiration, maximal respiration, proton leak, ATP production and spare capacity (Fig. 4B).
      
      
        PPP inhibitor changed the metabolic phenotype of NCI-H460 cells towards the phenotype of their MDR counterparts (NCI-H460/R)
        As aforementioned, sensitive cells possess more rate limiting enzymes of the PPP than their corresponding MDR cells (Tables 1 and 2 and Fig. 2). In addition, they showed a decrease in glycolytic parameters (Fig. 4A) and an increase in mitochondrial respiration (Fig. 4B). In order to confirm that the PPP is involved in the MDR phenotype, NCI-H460 cells (drug-sensitive) were treated with a sub-lethal concentration of dichloroacetate (DCA, a PPP inhibitor) and consequent alterations in glycolysis and OXPHOS were observed. After DCA treatment, the drug-sensitive cells acquired a metabolic phenotype similar to the one observed in the MDR cells, presenting an increase in glycolysis, glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve, and a decrease in their basal respiration, maximal respiration and ATP production by OXPHOS (Fig. 5). The MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) treated with DCA showed no changes in glycolytic function and mitochondrial respiration (data not shown).
      
      
        P-gp inhibitor changed the metabolic phenotype of MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) towards the phenotype of their corresponding sensitive cells (NCI-H460)
        In order to confirm the possible influence of P-gp in the observed metabolic alterations of the MDR cells, the NCI-H460/R were treated with a sub-lethal concentration of a well-known P-gp inhibitor, verapamil, and the levels of glycolysis and OXPHOS were analyzed. After treatment with verapamil, the MDR cells acquired a metabolic phenotype more similar to the one observed in sensitive cells, presenting a decrease in glycolysis, glycolytic capacity, glycolytic reserve and non-glycolytic acidification, and an increase in their basal respiration (Fig. 6).
      
      
        PPP inhibitor increased resistance of sensitive cells (NCI-H460) to doxorubicin
        To evaluate the possible contribution of PPP to the MDR phenotype, the NCI-H460 cells were pre-treated with a sub-lethal concentration of PPP inhibitor - DCA and then subjected to doxorubicin treatment (37.5 nM). The relative cell number was assessed and the ratio between sensitive cells treated with DCA and without DCA was calculated. The sensitive cells pre-treated with DCA were more resistant to doxorubicin compared to sensitive cells without DCA pre-treatment (Fig. 7A). The increase in doxorubicin resistance was also observed when cells were treated with higher concentrations of doxorubicin (75 nM and 150 nM) (data not shown).
      
      
        P-gp inhibitor sensitized MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) to doxorubicin
        To confirm the P-gp involvement in the MDR phenotype, the NCI-H460/R cells were pre-treated with a sub-lethal concentration of P-gp inhibitor - verapamil and then subjected to doxorubicin treatment (37.5 nM). The relative cell number was assessed and the ratio between MDR cells treated with verapamil and without verapamil was calculated. The MDR cells pre-treated with verapamil were more sensitive to doxorubicin compared to MDR cells without verapamil pre-treatment (Fig. 7B). The sensitization of MDR cells to doxorubicin was also observed with other concentrations of doxorubicin in a dose dependent manner (75 nM and 150 nM, data not shown).
      
      
        EVs from MDR cells were able to transfer their metabolic phenotype to the sensitive cells
        Next, we wanted to verify if MDR phenotype could be transferred to the drug-sensitive cells via EVs shed by the MDR cells. Therefore, drug-sensitive cells (NCI-H460) were treated with EVs isolated from the counterpart pairs of non-small cell lung cancer cells (NCI-H460 and NCI-H460/R) and chronic myeloid leukemia cells (K562 and K562Dox) (Fig. S1). After 15 h incubation, the drug-sensitive cells treated with the EVs shed by MDR cells (NCI-H460/R - Fig. 8A and K562Dox - Fig. 8B) acquired a metabolic phenotype more similar to the MDR cellular phenotype, i.e., an increase in glycolysis and in glycolytic capacity.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major problem in cancer treatment, responsible for chemotherapy failure4. MDR cancer cells usually have multiple mechanisms of resistance14. One of the most frequent MDR mechanisms is the overexpression of ABC transporters, such as P-gp2. Recent findings pointed that altered metabolic pathways help cancer cells to proliferate, adapt their metabolism to nutrient limited conditions, and importantly develop drug resistant phenotypes22. Therefore, targeting cellular metabolism could chemosensitize MDR cells92324. Understanding the metabolic adaptations of MDR cancer cells is important for the identification of new approaches to counteract this phenotype.
      In the present study, we have identified a complex network of metabolic alterations associated with the MDR phenotype that could lead to the identification of more efficient therapeutic MDR circumvention strategies. In addition, we have shown that EVs released by MDR cells are capable of stimulating a metabolic alteration (towards a MDR phenotype) in recipient drug-sensitive cancer cells.
      We confirmed that comparative proteomic approach is a powerful tool to investigate MDR mechanisms in cancer cells. MDR and their corresponding drug-sensitive cell lines from two distinct models (chronic myeloid leukemia and non-small cell lung cancer) were subjected to a label-free LC-MS quantitative proteomics. The obtained data allowed a comparison between the proteome from MDR cells and the one obtained from their drug-sensitive counterparts. In terms of biological processes, most of the identified DEPs (differentially expressed proteins between drug-sensitive and MDR cells) were involved in metabolic processes and the most active pathways enriched were those involved in cellular metabolism (GSH, PPP and Glycolysis). Therefore, we showed that the two MDR cell models acquired a similar metabolic profile but significantly distinct from the metabolic profile observed in their corresponding drug-sensitive cells.
      Interestingly, most of the DEPs involved in the PPP (including the rate limiting enzyme, G6PD) were downregulated in the MDR cells. PPP is a pivotal biosynthetic pathway branched to glycolysis and one of the main antioxidant cellular defense systems25. PPP has a central role as a source of nucleic acid precursors and provides reducing power and ribose phosphate to the cell26. Changes in the PPP activity can affect response to anticancer drugs, however the specific role of PPP in MDR phenotype is still unclear. Other authors implied that PPP is more active in MDR tumors2728. Moreover, evidence suggested that elevated levels of NADPH and GSH, together with an active PPP, play an important role in MDR2930. Our results together with other recent studies3132 contradict the above-mentioned reports, showing that PPP enzymes are downregulated in MDR cells. These results are controversial since one of the roles of PPP is to provide reducing power to the GSH metabolism and high levels of GSH in tumors have been linked to the development of MDR33. In addition, we found increased GSH levels in both MDR models, as previously published by other authors3435. Moreover, since GSH is a detoxification agent36, the levels of ROS in the MDR cells were decreased. In all, our results suggest that MDR cells are capable of maintaining high GSH levels even when PPP is downregulated. Therefore, we assumed that MDR cells upregulated another source of GSH.
      The methionine cycle is a key pathway for many methylation reactions (methylation of DNA, histones and non-histone proteins, such as transcription factors) and could be the source of cysteine residues necessary for GSH synthesis37. Growing evidence links aberrant regulation of methylation to tumorigenesis38. The epigenetic mechanisms underlying drug resistance have not been fully elucidated, although some studies have suggested the contribution of an altered chromatin state to drug resistance39. Our results showed considerable differences between MDR and their drug-sensitive cells, in the amount of several metabolites of the methionine/SAMe pathway. Methionine levels were significantly increased in the MDR cells, which could lead to the GSH increase observed in those cells. In addition, the methylation capacity of the cells was increased in both MDR models and this could be attributed to the metabolic alterations in MDR cells during development of their resistant phenotype. In agreement with our results, other authors have described that treatment with a methylation inhibitor reversed drug resistance indicating that the development of some cases of drug resistance could be methylation-dependent40. Also, MTA, dcSAMe, betaine, choline and serine are altered in MDR cells, although not in a similar manner. These differentially altered metabolites indicate that among these two MDR models there are also metabolic differences, which enhance the idea of the complex metabolism associated to MDR.
      The energy dependence of drug transport in MDR cells suggests that during development of MDR, cells undergo alterations in the energy utilization pathways. The main cell energy carrier, ATP, is produced in two metabolic pathways: glycolysis and/or oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) of metabolic fuels22. One of the fundamental hallmarks of cancer cells is the shift in the balance between these two energy-production pathways, in favor to glycolysis, known as the Warburg effect414243. For this reason, glycolysis inhibition has attracted significant interest as a possible way to sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy. Indeed, several studies in different cancer models have demonstrated an efficient suppression of MDR by glycolytic inhibitors823244445. Moreover, during the course of this work another study has suggested the possibility of an accelerated process of glycolysis in MDR cells to increase their energy supply46. To our knowledge, a comparison between MDR and drug-sensitive cells in terms of metabolic energy supply, using different modulators of glycolysis and OXPHOS, has never been performed. The results presented herein showed a statistically significant increase in glycolysis and in the glycolytic capacity of the MDR cells (NCI-H460/R), together with a decrease in the mitochondrial basal respiration and in the maximal capacity of the cells to perform OXPHOS compared to the drug-sensitive counterparts (NCI-H460). Therefore, our findings indicate that MDR cells, when acquiring the resistant phenotype, enhance their switch in the cellular energy supply pathways from OXPHOS to glycolysis. This altered metabolic activity in MDR cells could be crucial for: (i) supporting uncontrolled proliferation, since glycolysis provides the intermediates necessary for biosynthetic pathways; (ii) allowing the use of the most abundant extracellular nutrient (glucose) to produce abundant ATP. Even though the yield of ATP per glucose consumed is low, if the glycolytic flux is high enough, the percentage of cellular ATP produced by glycolysis can exceed the one produced by OXPHOS4748. Therefore, this metabolic phenotype could be beneficial for MDR cells at both levels of bioenergetics and biosynthesis.
      Although MDR cells perform less OXPHOS, the application of different OXPHOS modulators (oligomycin, FCCP and rotenone) affected more the drug-sensitive than their MDR counterpart cells. The OCR levels in the MDR cells have been less affected than the OCR levels in drug-sensitive cells. This suggests that MDR cells are more capable of sustaining the acquired metabolic phenotype in order to maintain the higher energy demand. In accordance, it was reported that the relationship between drug resistance and glycolysis may partially be due to the radical scavenging potential of the glycolytic intermediates, and the link between them and the cellular redox status49.
      Furthermore, the increase in glycolysis could be responsible for the decrease in the PPP observed in the MDR cells. Since some of the glycolysis and PPP intermediates are the same, it is possible that MDR cells are directing these intermediates mostly to glycolysis, in order to sustain the energy for the requested biosynthetic pathways. In fact, we demonstrated that when the PPP pathway was inhibited (with DCA50), drug-sensitive cells (NCI-H460) acquired a metabolic phenotype similar to that observed in MDR cells by increasing glycolysis and decreasing OXPHOS. Also, PPP inhibition increased resistance of sensitive cells to doxorubicin, when compared to sensitive cells without PPP inhibition. These results support the hypothesis that there is a competition between glycolysis and PPP activity in the MDR phenotype and also that modulation of the PPP and glycolytic pathways is capable of altering the sensitivity of cells to drugs.
      Additionally, in multicellular tumor spheroids and in doxorubicin-resistant human breast adenocarcinoma cells, the inhibition of glycolysis raised intracellular ROS, downregulated P-gp and reverted the MDR phenotype823. In agreement with these data, our work showed that treatment of MDR cells (NCI-H460/R) with a P-gp inhibitor (verapamil) switched their metabolic phenotype to that characteristic of sensitive cells (decrease in glycolysis and an increase in OXPHOS) and also promoted sensitization of the MDR cells to doxorubicin.
      Several studies have associated metabolic alterations with the shedding and cargo of EVs in different types of cells (such as increase lactate production18, inhibition of glutamine metabolism19 and the presence of several enzymes involved in glucose and glutamine metabolism20). The importance of EVs in the transfer of the MDR phenotype has been recently described131451. Therefore, the acquisition by MDR cells of a different metabolic phenotype, could be responsible for the differences in: (i) the type of EVs population released by MDR cells; (ii) their cargo and (iii) the capacity to transfer phenotypes to receiving cells. In fact, we have recently shown that MDR cells shed a different population of EVs (more microvesicle-like EVs and less exosomes) when compared to the EVs shed by the drug-sensitive counterpart cells1752. Additionally, our results showed that drug-sensitive cells (NCI-H460) co-incubated with EVs from MDR cells (NCI-H460/R and K562Dox), acquired a metabolic phenotype (increase in glycolysis) similar to the one observed in MDR cells. These results showed that, independently of the origin of the MDR cells (leukemia or lung cancer), their EVs are capable of inducing such alterations. However, surprisingly, our results showed that the EVs from the sensitive leukemic cell line were also capable of inducing alterations in the glycolytic capacity of the recipient drug-sensitive cells. The reason for this is unknown, but is possibly due to the exposure of cells to high levels of EVs, therefore not related to MDR. Furthermore, a recent study has described that glutamine metabolism was altered in cancer cells following incubation with large EVs (microvesicles), an effect that was not observed upon incubation with exosomes20. This further highlights the importance of verifying the type of EVs released by donor cells, since different EVs may transfer different phenotypes to receiving cells.
    
    
      Conclusions
      In conclusion, P-gp overexpressing MDR cells may employ various protective metabolic strategies to survive (schematically represented in Fig. 9). These include (i) alterations in the GSH metabolism, (ii) increasing the methylation index influencing epigenetic regulation, (iii) increasing the rates of glycolysis and (iv) changing the phenotype of the surrounding drug-sensitive cells, by EVs mediated transfer of new features. Our results indicate that the development of MDR is a complex phenomenon that involves several simultaneous metabolic alterations.
      We clarified for the first time the complex metabolic network of the various metabolic alterations associated with MDR in cancer cells. In addition, that MDR cancer cells are more capable than drug-sensitive cells of sustaining its specific metabolic profile. Specifically, we showed for the first time that MDR cancer cells, besides increased glycolysis also have increased glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve, while their OXPHOS rate is decreased. In addition, our work found differences between MDR and drug-sensitive cells in the amount of several metabolites of the methionine/SAMe pathway which regulates DNA and protein methylation, as well as GSH production. Finally, we demonstrated for the first time the transfer of metabolic information from MDR to drug-sensitive cancer cells through a specific population of EVs.
    
    
      Materials and Methods
      
        Cell culture
        The chronic myeloid leukemia cell line K562 was from European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC) and its P-gp overexpressing counterpart cell line K562Dox was a kind gift of Dr. J.P. Marie (Paris, France)5354. The non-small cell lung cancer cell line NCI-H460 and its drug-resistant P-gp overexpressing counterpart cell line NCI-H460/R were a kind gift from Dr. M. Pešić (Belgrade, Serbia)5556. All cell lines were genotyped and routinely monitored for mycoplasma contamination by PCR (VenorGeM® Advance Mycoplasma Detection Kit, Minerva). All cells were routinely grown in RPMI-1640 (with Ultraglutamine I and 25 mM HEPES) medium (Lonza), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, PAA) at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 in air. Cell number and viability were analyzed with trypan blue exclusion assay. All experiments were carried out with exponentially growing cells having over 90% viability.
      
      
        Sample preparation and mass spectrometry using LC/MS/MS
        Pellets from cells (K562, K562Dox, NCI-H460 and NCI-H460/R) were processed and 10 μg of proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry using LC/MS/MS as previously described17. Biological replicates (from 4 independent experiments) were analyzed for each sample type.
      
      
        Label-Free LC-MS quantitative profiling
        Label-free LC–MS analysis was carried out using Progenesis QI for proteomics v4.1 software (NonLinear Dynamics, UK), essentially as recommended by the manufacturer (see www.nonlinear.com for further background to alignment, normalization, calculation of peptide abundance, etc.).
        This software extracts quantitative information from MS1 data by aligning the data based on the LC retention time of each sample to a reference file (sample run that yielded most peptide ions); this allows for any drift in retention time, giving an adjusted retention time for all runs in the analysis.
        Results were filtered, based on statistical analysis. The Progenesis peptide quantification algorithm calculates peptide abundance as the sum of the peak areas within its isotope boundaries. Each abundance value is then transformed to a normalized abundance value by applying a global scaling factor. Protein abundance was calculated as the sum of the abundances of all peptide ions, which have been identified as coming from the same protein. Any peptides with an ANOVA score of p > 0.05 were eliminated. The MS2 data for the remaining peptides was exported and the resulting MGF file used to search the NewUniProtSwissprot database (updated in January 2014) on the MASCOT server (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identifications. The search parameters used were as follows: (1) species, Homo sapiens; (2) allowed number of missed cleavages, 2; (3) fixed modification, carboxylmethyl; (4) variable modifications, methionine oxidation; (5) peptide mass tolerance ± 20 ppm; (6) MS/MS tolerance ± 0.6 Da; and (7) peptide charge +1, +2 and +3. Only peptides with ion scores of 40 and above were considered and re-imported back into Progenesis QI software for further analysis. Peptide identifications were imported into the Progenesis software and assigned to the matching features. Protein scores were based on ANOVA values with a cut off of p < 0.05. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between drug-sensitive and MDR cells with ≥2 peptides matched and a ≥ 1.5 fold differences in abundance were considered as significant. Peptide conflicts occur when a peptide is identified as present in more than one protein. These were resolved by assigning the peptide to the protein with the greater number of hits, a greater Mascot score or a lower mass error; when conflicts could not be clearly resolved, the peptide was excluded from the analysis.
      
      
        Bioinformatics analysis of the detected DEPs
        The two data sets (DEPs from K562 vs. K562Dox cells and NCI-H460 vs. NCI-H460/R cells) were analyzed using bioinformatics methods. Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID 6.7) was used to identify protein and molecular pathway modifications. UniProt accession numbers were obtained by Progenesis software. To understand the high-level functions and utilization of the biological systems from molecular-level information, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway was used. Distributions in subcellular locations, biological processes and molecular functions were assigned to each protein based on Gene Ontology (GO) categories. The significantly (p < 0.05) enriched categories are presented.
      
      
        Analysis of Protein Expression by Western Blot
        Cell pellets were lysed in Winman’s Buffer (1% NP-40, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.15 M NaCl and 5 mM EDTA) with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Total protein content of cell lysates was quantified with “DC Protein assay kit” (Bio-Rad) and 20 μg of protein were subjected to SDS-PAGE (12% Bis-Tris gel). Following electrophoretic transfer of the proteins into nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, UK), membranes were then incubated with the following primary antibodies: goat anti-Actin (1:2000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-P-gp (P7965) (1:2000; Sigma), G6PD (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 6PGD (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and IDH1 (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The following secondary antibodies were then used: anti-mouse IgG-HRP; anti-rabbit IgG-HRP or anti-goat IgG-HRP (all diluted 1:2000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Signal was detected using the ECL Western blot Detection Reagents (GE Healthcare, UK), the Amersham Hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare, UK), and the Kodak GBX developer and fixer (Sigma, EUA)57. The intensity of the bands obtained in each film was further analyzed using the software Quantity One – 1D Analysis (Bio-Rad, USA).
      
      
        GSH/GSSG-GloTM assay
        To measure GSH levels, the GSH/GSSG-GloTM Assay (Promega, USA) was used following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 5000 cells/well were plated in white 96-opaque well plates. NCI-H460 and NCI-H460/R cells were plated in 100 μl of RPMI-1640; K562 and K562Dox cells were plated in 20 μl of Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). Total glutathione lysis reagent or oxidized glutathione lysis reagent were added to the cells. After incubation at room temperature a luciferin generation reagent was added to all samples and the plates were incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Luminescence was quantified using a microplate reader (Biotek Instruments Inc. Synergy MX. USA). Positive control (cells treated with 5 μM staurosporine for 4 h) and wells with no cells were also included as controls. GSH levels were calculated as follows: GSH levels = total glutathione levels – oxidized glutathione levels.
      
      
        ROS Detection
        2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2DCF-DA) analysis by flow cytometry were used to measure ROS concentration in drug-sensitive and MDR cells. K562 and K562Dox cells (8 × 105/well) were plated in 6-well plates; NCI-H460 and NCI-H460/R cells (3 × 105/well) were plated in 6-well plates for 24 h. Cells were harvested and incubated in adequate medium with 10 μM CM-H2DCFDA for 45 min at 37 °C in the dark. Cells were subsequently washed twice in PBS and the CM-H2DCFDA fluorescence was analyzed in a BD Accuri flow cytometer (FL1-H channel). A positive control (cells treated with 1 μM staurosporine for 6 h) was also included. Mean fluorescence intensity was calculated after correction for auto-fluorescence.
      
      
        Semi-quantitative analysis of metabolites of the methionine/S-adenosylmethionine pathway
        Total cell pellets (4 independent preparations for each cell line) were lysed in 500 μL of a mixture of ice-cold water/metanol/10 mM acetic acid (49/50/1 v/v/v%) with a tissue homogenizer (Precellys) in 1 × 20 second cycles at 6000 rpm. Subsequently, 400 μL of the homogenate was transferred to a new aliquot and shaken at 1400 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Next the aliquots were centrifuged for 15 min at 14000 rpm at 4 °C. 75 μL of the supernatant was transferred to a fresh aliquot and placed at −80 °C for 20′. The chilled supernatants were evaporated with a speedvac in approximately 3 h. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 100 μL water/acetonitrile (MeCN)/formic acid (40/60/0.1 v/v/v%, resuspension solution).
        Concentrations of methionine, MTA, SAMe, SAH, spermidine and spermine were determined with a semi-quantitative method. Calibration curves for these compounds were obtained, by measuring serial dilutions of a pooled standard mixture in resuspension solution. The concentrations for all compounds in the dilutions ranged from 100 μM to 0.025 μM. For the standard mixtures, separate 10 mM stocks of the standards were made. These were then pooled and further diluted in resuspension solution in order to obtain the final concentrations as used for the calibration curve.
        Samples were measured with a UPLC system (Acquity, Waters, Manchester) coupled to a Time of Flight mass spectrometer (ToF MS, SYNAPT G2, Waters). A 2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 μm BEH amide column (Waters), thermostated at 40 °C, was used to separate the analytes before entering the MS. Solvent A (aqueous phase) consisted of 99.5% water, 0.5% formic acid and 20 mM ammonium formate while solvent B (organic phase) consisted of 29.5% water, 70% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid and 1 mM ammonium formate.
        In order to obtain a good separation of the analytes the following gradient was used: from 5% A to 50% A in 2.4 minutes in curved gradient (#8, as defined by Waters), from 50% A to 99.9% A in 0.2 minutes constant at 99.9% A for 1.2 minutes, back to 5% A in 0.2 minutes. The flow rate was 0.250 mL/min and the injection volume was 2 μL. All samples were injected randomly. After every 10 injections a QC sample was injected. All samples were injected in duplicate.
        Analytes were measured in enhanced duty cycle (EDC) mode, optimized for the mass of the analyte in question. MTA was measured in scan function 1 (EDC at 298), choline was measured in scan function 2 (EDC at 104), methionine was measured in scan function 3 (EDC at 150), SAH was measured in scan function 8 (EDC at 385), SAMe was measured in scan function 10 (EDC at 399), spermidine was measured in scan function 12 (EDC at 146), spermine was measured in scan function 13 (EDC at 203). The cone voltage was between 20 and 25 depending on the analyte. A 2 ng/mL leucine-enkephalin solution in water/acetonitrile/formic acid (49.9/50/0.1%v/v/v) was infused at 10 μL/min and used for a lock mass which was measured each 47 seconds for 0.5 seconds. Spectral peaks were automatically corrected for deviations in the lock mass.
        Extracted ion traces were obtained for methionine (m/z = 150.0589), SAH (m/z = 385.1294), SAMe (m/z = 399.1451), MTA (m/z = 298.097), spermidine (m/z = 146.1657) and Spermine (m/z = 203.2236) in a 20 mDa window and subsequently smoothed (2 points, 2 iterations) and integrated with QuanLynx software (Waters, Manchester).
      
      
        Extracellular flux assay using Seahorse XF-24 Analyser
        ECAR, reflecting the rate of glycolysis, and OCR, reflecting the rate of OXPHOS, were measured using a Seahorse Bioscience (Copenhagen, Denmark) XF24 analyzer. Briefly, 2 × 104 cells/well for glycolysis stress test and 3 × 104 cells/well for mitochondrial stress test were plated in Seahorse XF24 plates in 200 μl of RPMI-1640 and incubated for 20–24 h at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 in air and 1 h hour prior to the XF assay in a humidified incubator without CO2 with the corresponding assay media. In the experiments where the cells were treated with DCA, the treatment was performed for 24 h with a concentration of 5 mM. The verapamil treatment was performed for 15 h with 2 μM. NCI-H460/R treated with DCA and NCI-H460 treated with verapamil were used as controls.
        Basal OCR measurements were made in DMEM containing 10 mM sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen, California, EUA), 10 mM Glucose (Invitrogen, California, EUA) and 10 mM Glutamax (Invitrogen, California, EUA) and Basal ECAR measurements were made in DMEM without any supplementation.
        Steady-state (baseline) oxygen consumption rates and extracellular acidification rates were measured. Non-glycolytic acidification, glycolysis, glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve were measured, through ECAR, by injecting: glucose, oligomycin and 2-deoxyglucose. Basal respiration, proton leak, spare capacity, maximal respiration, non-mitochondrial respiration and ATP production were measured, through OCR, after the sequential injection of oligomycin, FCCP and rotenone. All measurements were normalized to protein quantity with crystal violet.
      
      
        Sulforhodamine B assay
        The Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay was performed to measure cell growth indirectly, by measuring total protein content. The NCI-H460 and NCI-H460/R cells were seeded in 96-well plates (5000 cells/well), and pre-treated with 5 mM DCA for 24 h or with 2 μM verapamil for 15 h, respectively. Cells were then treated in duplicate with 3 serial dilutions of doxorubicin (37.5 nM, 75 nM and 150 nM) for 48 h. Cells were fixed with 10% (w/v) ice cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and then washed with distilled water. After staining proteins with 0.4% (w/v) SRB, cells were washed with 1% (v/v) acetic acid, the bound SRB was solubilized with 10 mM Tris base and absorbance was measured at 510 nm in a multiplate reader (Synergy Mx, Biotek Instruments Inc.). The ratio between cells with a pre-treatment and cells without the pre-treatment was calculated. NCI-H460 treated with DCA only and NCI-H460/R treated with verapamil only were used as controls.
      
      
        Co-culture of H460 cells with EVs
        EVs were isolated from the culture media of drug-sensitive or MDR cells by various centrifugation steps as previously described17. EVs pellets were re-suspended in 100 μl of PBS and frozen at −80 °C. NCI-H460 cells were treated with 18 × 108 EVs (quantified by nanoparticle tracking analysis as in Supplementary Information) for 15 hours and were subsequently metabolically profiled using Seahorse XF-24 Analyzer.
      
      
        Statistical analysis
        All presented data resulted from at least three independent experiments (excluding the EVs treatment which was performed in two independent experiments only). All data was statistically analyzed with the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. Results were considered statistically significant when p ≤ 0.05.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Lopes-Rodrigues, V. et al. Identification of the metabolic alterations associated with the multidrug resistant phenotype in cancer and their intercellular transfer mediated by extracellular vesicles. Sci. Rep.
7, 44541; doi: 10.1038/srep44541 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Information
        
        
      
    
  
        Melanoma of the uveal tract accounts for approximately 5% of all melanomas and represents the most common primary intraocular malignancy. Despite improvements in diagnosis and more effective local therapies for primary cancer, the rate of metastatic death has not changed in the past forty years. In the present study, we made use of bioinformatics to analyze the data obtained from three public available microarray datasets on uveal melanoma in an attempt to identify novel putative chemotherapeutic options for the liver metastatic disease. We have first carried out a meta-analysis of publicly available whole-genome datasets, that included data from 132 patients, comparing metastatic vs. non metastatic uveal melanomas, in order to identify the most relevant genes characterizing the spreading of tumor to the liver. Subsequently, the L1000CDS2 web-based utility was used to predict small molecules and drugs targeting the metastatic uveal melanoma gene signature. The most promising drugs were found to be Cinnarizine, an anti-histaminic drug used for motion sickness, Digitoxigenin, a precursor of cardiac glycosides, and Clofazimine, a fat-soluble iminophenazine used in leprosy. In vitro and in vivo validation studies will be needed to confirm the efficacy of these molecules for the prevention and treatment of metastatic uveal melanoma.
      
    Uveal melanoma is the most common primary intraocular cancer, and after the skin, the uveal tract is the second most common location for melanoma1. However, cutaneous and uveal melanomas are different in terms of biology, natural history and response to chemotherapies2.
    The 5-year survival rate is 50–70% and about 50% of patients develop metastases within a median of 36 months, almost exclusively to the liver, with a median survival of 6 months after metastases3.
    The most frequent chromosomal abnormalities in uveal melanoma are loss of chromosome 3 and gains of 8q and 6p. Patients with chromosome 3 loss undergo the worst prognosis, whereas those with chromosome 6 (6p) gain have the best outcomes. Mutations in G-protein-α subunits GNAQ or GNA11 are observed in ≥80% of primary uveal melanomas and inactivating BAP1 mutations are found in approximately 50% of all cases, most frequently in metastatic disease. Mutations that are associated with a less aggressive behavior are those in splicing factor 3B subunit 1 (SF3B1) and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1A, X-linked (EIF1AX)4.
    Local radiation therapy, using brachytherapy or alternatively, charged-particle and proton-beam radiation, is the most common approach456. Enucleation remains the only option for very large tumors.
    Despite improved understanding of the disease, the overall survival (OS) rate has not increased since the 1970 s. Indeed, once uveal melanoma has metastasized to distant organs, the disease is resistant to current chemotherapies. Distant metastasis are infrequent at the time of initial presentation, occurring in <5% of patients. For patients who develop metastasis, there is yet no standard of care. Dacarbazine, has been used for uveal melanoma, but efficacy is limited. Other chemotherapeutics, i.e. temozolomide, cisplatin, treosulfan, fotemustine and various combinations have been tested in uveal melanoma with disappointing results. A few adjuvant studies have been performed in uveal melanoma to prevent metastatic disease. However, no significant effects on metastasis free survival or OS benefit have been obtained, up to date4.
    In the present study, we made use of bioinformatics to analyze the data obtained from three public available microarray datasets on uveal melanoma in attempt to identify novel putative chemotherapeutic options for the metastatic disease.
    
      Material and Methods
      
        Microarray dataset selection and meta-analysis
        The NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)7 was used to identify suitable microarray datasets comparing localized vs. metastatic uveal melanomas. Three datasets were included in the study GSE221388- GSE736529, and GSE44295, that included whole-genome transcriptomic data from primary melanoma cells obtained upon eye enucleation (Table 1). The following information were extracted from each of the studies that were selected: GEO accession; sample type; platform; numbers of patients and controls; and gene expression data. Briefly, the GSE22138 dataset included 28 samples of non-metastatic tumor and 35 samples from enucleated patients having distant metastasis. Patients were included in the group of localized tumors if no metastasis were observed in 36 months of follow-up. The GSE73652 dataset included 5 samples of non-metastatic tumor and 8 samples from enucleated patients having distant metastasis. Metastasis-free cases were included only if there was >6 years follow-up. No detailed clinical data are available for GSE44292, that included 32 samples from patients with localized disease and 24 sample from patients with metastasis. Illumina platforms were pre-processed using Bead-array prior to quantile normalization (Dunning et al., 2007), while Affymetrix platforms were pre-processed and quantile normalized using the robust multiarray average (RMA). The datasets were uploaded to INMEX (http://www.inmex.ca/INMEX)10, and the data annotated by converting probe ID to Entrez IDs. For each probe-set, intensity values were auto-scaled and a data integrity check was performed prior to the meta-analysis stage. Batch effects were corrected using the “ComBat” function. A random effects model of effect size (ES) measure was used to integrate gene expression patterns from the three datasets. The random effects model presumes that different studies present substantial diversity, and evaluates between-study variance as well as within-study sampling error. Genes with FDR < 0.01 were identified as Differentially Expressed (DE) and selected for further analysis.
      
      
        Gene Ontology (GO) and Drug Prediction Analysis
        Functional relationships among DE gene were obtained from GeneMania (http://genemania.org/
http://genemania.org/)11. GeneMANIA searches publicly available genomics and proteomics data, including data from gene and protein expression profiling studies and primary and curated molecular interaction networks and pathways, to find related genes. The network weighting method is ‘Gene-Ontology (GO) based weighting, Biological Process based’. This weighting method assumes the input gene list is related in terms of biological processes (as defined by GO).
        The PANTHER (protein annotation through evolutionary relationship) classification system12 (http://www.pantherdb.org/) was used to classify input genes according to their function (PANTHER protein class). PANTHER is a comprehensive system that combines gene function, ontology, pathways and statistical tools that enable to analyze large-scale, genome-wide data from sequencing, proteomics or gene expression experiments.
        The L1000CDS2 was used to identify potential chemotherapeutics for metastatic uveal melanoma. L1000CDS2 enables to find L1000 small molecule signatures that match input gene signatures. The L1000 mRNA gene-expression dataset is generated as part of the Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) project, a NIH Common Fund program. LINCS aims to profile the molecular effects of small molecules on human cells13. When gene lists are submitted to L1000CDS2, the search engine compares the input gene lists to the DE genes computed from the LINCS L1000 data and returns the top 50 matched signatures. The result score is the overlap between the input DE genes and the signature DE genes divided by the effective input. The effective input is the length of the intersection between the input genes and the L1000 genes. L1000CDS2 currently covers chemically perturbed gene expression profiles from 62 cell-lines and 3,924 small molecules. Also, L1000CDS2 allows to predict effective drug combinations by comparing every possible pair among the top 50 signatures and computing the potential synergy for each pair.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Meta-analysis of gene expression in metastatic uveal melanoma
        Three GEO data sets were identified for the following analysis (Table 1). These datasets consisted of primary uveal melanoma data, and included a total of 67 metastatic tumors and 65 localized primary tumors. Details of the individual studies are presented in Table 1. Figure 1A shows a Principal Component Analysis of the three separate microarray datasets included in the meta-analysis.
        A total of 64 genes were identified, which were consistently modulated in metastatic tumors. Among these 64 DE genes, 29 were upregulated and 35 were downregulated. A list of the significant upregulated and downregulated genes is shown in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. An heatmap showing the 64 DE genes is presented in Fig. 1B. The functional relationships among the up- and down-regulated genes, respectively, are presented in Fig. 2A,B. Among the upregulated genes, the top three represented protein classes were: Transferase, which included phosphatases (CDC25B and IMPA1) and proteases (IDE and TYSND1); Enzyme Modulator, including G protein modulators (SGSM2, SRGAP2 and SIPA1L2) and the protease inhibitor, HPN; Nucleic Acid Binding, i.e. the DNA helicase, CHD7, and the DNA ligase, LIG1 (Fig. 2C).
        Among the downregulated genes, the top three protein classes represented were: Nucleic Acid Binding, that included DNA binding proteins (H2AFY2, NDN and MBNL1) and RNA binding proteins (ANG, EIF4A2 and EIF4A3); Hydrolase, including the proteases, ABHD6 and LTA4H, and the lipase, PLCD1; Enzyme Modulator, including the G protein modulator, PLCD1, the kinase modulator, HOOK1, and the protease inhibitor, VWA5A (Fig. 2D).
      
      
        Prediction of novel chemotherapeutics for metastatic uveal melanoma
        The L1000CDS2 web-based utility was used to predict small molecules and drugs targeting the metastatic uveal melanoma gene signature. Figure 3 shows a clustergram with the top ranked L1000 perturbations (e.g. those with most anti-similar signatures). The complete list of predicted chemotherapeutics is presented as Table 4. Several of these drugs are FDA-approved and already used in the clinic or tested in clinical trials, as indicated in Table 4. Among the predicted chemotherapeutics, the most represented classes were: histone deacetylase inhibitors (that included HDAC6 inhibitor ISOX, BRD-K13810148, Trichostatin A and Vorinostat), and anti-infectious/parasitic drugs (i.e., Clofazimine, Erythromycin ethylsuccinate, Demeclocycline and Quinacrine hydrochloride). The top identified drugs were the following: BRD-K07220430 (Cinnarizine), an anti-histaminic drug used for motion sickness, was predicted for its ability to downregulate CHAC1 and to upregulate MBNL1, LPAR6, PLSCR4, NDN, ABHD6, ZSCAN18 and ZBTB20; Digitoxigenin, for its ability to downregulate CDC25B, IDE, INTS8 and MTDH, while upregulating F11R, ID2, and RAB11FIP1; clofazimine, a fat-soluble iminophenazine used in leprosy, which is able to downregulate CDC25B, CHAC1, and SHC1, and to upregulate ABHD6, PLOD2, PLSCR4, ZBTB20, ZSCAN18. Accordingly, the top three most promising drug combination found were: BRD-K07220430 and Digitoxigenin; Digitoxigenin and OSSK_645683; BRD-K07220430 and HDAC6 inhibitor ISOX (for the complete list, see Table 5).
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Melanoma of the uveal tract accounts for 5% of all melanomas and, with an incidence of about 6 cases per million person–years, represents the most common primary intraocular malignancy1415. Despite improvements in diagnosis and more effective local therapies for primary cancer, the rate of metastatic death has not changed in the past forty years15.
      Several genes and pathways have been identified to be involved in the progression and metastasis of uveal melanoma, such as c-Met16, Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF)1617, Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R)18, the CXCL12-CXCR4 pathway1719, VEGF20, Mda-9/syntenin21 and the PTP4A3 phosphatase8. However, despite increasing knowledge in the biology of uveal melanoma, no therapeutic strategies has been found to be effective. Metastatic uveal melanoma is resistant to current systemic chemotherapy and, to date, no clear role has been established for chemotherapy in several clinical trials, that reported objective response rates <20%4. Single-agent chemotherapies (e.g., dacarbazina, fotemustine, paclitaxel, temozolomide, camptothecin, treosulfan) or combination chemotherapies (e.g. gemcitabine/treosulfan, cisplatin/gemcitabine/treosulfan, carboplatin/paclitaxel/sorafenib) have shown poor response rates and immunotherapy with ipilimumab, antiangiogenetic treatment strategies using bevacizumab combined with interferon-α2b, temozolomide, or aflibercept have not proven to be superior to chemotherapy22.
      In order to prevent metastatic disease, several adjuvant studies are also being conducted using ipilimumab, sunitinib, valproic acid, and crizotinib for high-risk patients4. Adjuvant treatment with bacillus Calmette-Guerin and interferon-α, as well as, intra-arterial hepatic infusion of fotemustine, have been previously studied in an effort to reduce the occurrence of liver metastasis, but none of these studies has demonstrated significant improvement in metastasis free survival or OS4.
      The limited efficacy of current chemotherapies proves the medical need for more effective treatment strategies in metastatic uveal melanoma. In the present study, a meta-analysis of three whole-genome microarray datasets on primary tumor samples from the enucleated eyes of patients with localized or metastatic disease, has been performed in order to investigate the genes associated to the metastatic properties of uveal melanoma and to identify potential chemotherapeutic strategies to be used in metastatic disease.
      It was recently developed a 15-gene qPCR-based assay that discriminate between primary uveal melanomas that have a low metastatic risk and a high metastatic risk 23. This platform is currently used in a College of American Pathologists (CAP)-accredited Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratory on fine needle aspiration samples and on formalin-fixed specimens23. A few of the genes screened in this assay correspond to those identified by the current analysis, namely ID2 and LTA4H, among the downregulated genes. Some of the other DE genes, share similar function to those included in the assay, i.e. EIF4A2 and EIF4E2 (to EIF1B).
      As regards the putative drugs here identified, some of them are already in clinical use, such as BRD-K07220430 (Cinnarizine)24, clofazimine25, mesoridazine besylate26, erythromycin ethylsuccinate27; other are in preclinical development (e.g. HDAC6 inhibitor ISOX)28 or do not have any known pharmacological target, e.g. OSSK_645683. Interestingly, some of the identified drugs are histone deacetylase inhibitors (such as, HDAC6 inhibitor ISOX, BRD-K13810148, Trichostatin A and Vorinostat), that have already been shown efficacy on uveal melanoma preclinical models2930313233343536. Klisovic and collaborators have shown that the histone deacetylase inhibitor, Depsipeptide (FR901228), inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in primary and metastatic human uveal melanoma cell lines35, as well as it is able to inhibit in vitro uveal melanoma cell lines migration via downregulation of Matrix MetalloProteinases 2, 9 and Membrane Type-1/MMP (MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT-1/MMP) and the upregulation of Tissue Inhibitors of Matrix MetalloProteinases 1 and 2 (TIMP-1 and TIMP-2)34. Chen and collaborators have shown that microRNA-137 and microRNA-124a act as a tumor suppressors in uveal melanoma and could be successfully silenced by using the histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A3236. Landreville and collegues have shown that in three uveal melanoma cell lines (92.1, OCM1A, and Mel202), Trichostatin A was able to reduce the fraction of viable cells and increase the proportion of cells undergoing apoptosis33. Also, it was shown that Quisinostat (a Class I and II histone deacetylase inhibitor) inhibited the migration and proliferation of 92.1 and OMM2.3 cell lines in zebrafish xenograft embryos30. In addition, the Class III-specific HDAC inhibitor, Tenovin-6, was shown to be able to eradicate cancer stem cells in 92.1 and Mel 270 cells29. Venza in 201431, reported that the Class-I histone deacetylase inhibitor, MS-275, due to its ability to reduce c-FLIP expression, is able to increase TRAIL-induced cell death in uveal melanoma cell lines. MS-275, is currently tested in a Phase 1 study for the treatment of patients with Refractory Solid Tumors, including intraocular melanoma, or Lymphomas (NCT00020579). Vorinostat, a small molecule inhibitor of class I and II histone deacetylases, is currently tested in two Phase 2 Study on Ocular Melanoma With Extraocular Extension, Recurrent Uveal Melanoma and Grade IV Metastatic Uveal Melanoma (NCT00121225, NCT 01587352).
      The utility of the present data may reside primarily in the potential identification of effective adjuvant treatments. In light of the fact that there is no therapy for metastatic disease, the most promising strategy to improve survival is to treat patients in an adjuvant setting. Although there might be non- metastasizing melanomas, which never metastasize, even if not treated, however the intra-tumoral genetic heterogeneity suggests an ongoing evolutionary tumoral process37. Adjuvant interventions could settle up the uncertainty about the effect of ocular treatment on survival, since some patients might unnecessarily sacrifice their visus in the hope of a longer life-expectancy; while other patients with small melanomas might succumb due to metastasis because treatment has been delayed. Presently, there is no adjuvant approach that improves outcome, but the impact of ocular treatment, in terms of therapeutic benefit, has ethical implications.
      The present study has several advantages but also limitations. It represents, to date, the largest meta-analysis comparing metastatic vs. non metastatic uveal melanomas, encompassing whole-genomic data from a total of 132 patients. A strict and rigorous statistics has been applied to data in order to sort out the most relevant genes characterizing the spreading of tumor to the liver. Among the upregulated genes, the highest effect size was detected for JPH1, encoding for Junctophilin-1, a component of junctional complexes between the plasma membrane and endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum, providing functional cross-talk between the cell surface and intracellular calcium release channels (http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=JPH1). Among the significant downregulated genes, the gene with the highest effect size was PLSCR4, encoding for the Phospholipid Scramblase 4, which has been found to be strongly expressed in the neuropil of malignant gliomas and in cytoplasm of liver cancers, colorectal cancers and malignant melanomas (http://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000114698-PLSCR4/cancer). Comparing to the original analysis, the PTP4A3 phosphatases and the cancer-testis antigen, PRAME, were dropped out because of too little statistical significance. In addition, although the role of the PKC, MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling cascades has been extensively examined in uveal melanoma383940, however, whole genome transcriptomic analysis may fail to detect their modulation, because of the primary contribution related to post-transcriptional modifications. Also, our analysis was very statistical stringent (FDR < 0.01), and this may account for the differences from previously published work1. Furthermore, the discrepancies with previous analysis may be due to the enlargement of the number of samples which could influence DE genes detection as respect to smaller sample groups.
      Investigating the genes found to be significantly modulated in the present analysis may help to identify the molecular mechanisms involved in the liver metastasis of uveal melanoma, and may allow the identification of novel pharmacological targets for the prevention and treatment of liver involvement. Moreover, our study was aimed at predicting putative pharmacological schemes to apply as adjuvant or curative therapy, making use of the Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) project database. The repurposing of drugs currently approved for use in the clinical setting may expedite the design of phase II-III clinical trials, being cost-effective and reducing the risks associated with early stages of drug development41. The highest ranking scores were found for Cinnarizine, Digitoxigenin and Clofazimine. Cinnarizine has already been shown to be effective in vitro against lymphoma and multiple myeloma42 and to inhibit melanogenesis in mouse B16 melanoma cells43, and Clofazimine was found effective in preclinical models of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and triple-negative breast cancer4445.
      However, this study has also limitations. Despite the practicality of this bioinformatic approach, there are drawbacks to point out. First, the efficacy of a drug is more complex than the simple match of expression profiles. Drugs have to reach tissue-specific concentrations to exert an effect, and the route and timing of administration is essential for the drug to be effective and to limit side effects. A preliminary in vitro testing on both primary and established cancer cell lines will be required before running pilot phase II clinical trials. On the other hand, for successful result of the clinical trials, the appropriate selection and recruitment of patients will be also key to evaluate the potential activity of the compounds in the clinical setting.
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Fagone, P. et al. Identification of novel chemotherapeutic strategies for metastatic uveal melanoma. Sci. Rep.
7, 44564; doi: 10.1038/srep44564 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
  
        The morphology of breast tumors is complicated and diagnosis can be difficult. We present here a novel diagnostic model which we validate on both array-based and RNA sequencing platforms which reliably distinguishes this tumor type across multiple cohorts. We also examine how this molecular classification predicts sensitivity to common chemotherapeutics in cell-line based assays. A total of 1845 invasive breast cancer cases in six cohorts were collected, split into discovery and validation cohorts, and a classifier was created and compared to pathological diagnosis, grade and survival. In the validation cohorts the concordance of predicted diagnosis with a pathological diagnosis was 92%, and 97% when inconclusively classified cases were excluded. Tumor-derived cell lines were classified with the model as having predominantly ductal or lobular-like molecular physiologies, and sensitivity of these lines to relevant compounds was analyzed. A diagnostic tool can be created that reliably distinguishes lobular from ductal carcinoma and allows the classification of cell lines on the basis of molecular profiles associated with these tumor types. This tool may assist in improved diagnosis and aid in explorations of the response of lobular type breast tumor models to different compounds.
      
    Breast cancer is one of the most prevalent and malignant tumors, and is the second leading cause of cancer mortality among women12. A growing body of work has found that addressing its molecular and clinical heterogeneity is necessary to determine effective treatment strategies34. Invasive ductal breast carcinoma (IDC, or invasive carcinoma of no special type in the current WHO classification) and invasive lobular breast carcinoma (ILC) are the main two pathologically defined groups of mammary malignances, accounting for 80% and 15% of all the invasive breast cancer, respectively56789. Additionally, several other pathologic variants have been reported in recent years10. Owing to its distinct histological patterns, biological and prognostic features, ILCs are generally believed to represent a specific entity, distinct from IDCs in terms of lineage and molecular features11121314, though the nature of this lineage is still a subject of active research.
    Invasive ductal tumors are currently defined as a diagnosis of exclusion, not belonging to other breast subtypes, and accounts for the majority of breast cancer cases. These tumors tend to form glandular structures, whereas lobular tumors are generally confined to the terminal lobules, though can invade along the ductal system, and are less cohesive than ductal tumors15. Additionally, lobular tumors tend to be less aggressive than ductal tumors, and are frequently distinguished by their molecular physiology, as they often exhibit loss of E-cadherin and are typically estrogen and progesterone receptor positive16171819. Additionally, lobular tumors have been noted to have several distinctive genomic alterations, including gain on 1q and loss of chromosome 16q20. A recent large study of lobular features also categorized several mutations in the PTEN, TBX3, and FOXA1 genes that typify lobular carcinomas14. Additionally, ductal tumors often metastasize to the bone, lung and liver, via lymph glands and blood system, while lobular tumors are inclined to metastasize to genital tracts, the gastrointestinal system, and meninges10212223242526.
    These observational studies suggest that ductal and lobular tumors’ progression and development follow distinctive pathways. The traditional theory of ductal and lobular breast carcinoma tumorigenesis supposed ductal carcinomas progress from ductal hyperplasias to ductal carcinoma in situs and ultimately to invade surrounding tissue, migrating into the fatty tissue after penetrating the wall of the ducts, while lobular carcinomas originate from lobular hyperplasias and progress to infiltrating lobular carcinomas. However, genomic studies cast doubt on this explanation, and suggest more complex developmental pathways27. Lobular carcinoma share some similarities with low-grade invasive ductal carcinoma, though with unique metastatic and histologic features, and it has been observed that many subtypes of mammary carcinoma appear to present genomic alterations or expression patterns strongly associated with histologic grade27282930. Pathologically defined lobular and ductal tumors when both are present in individual cases have been proposed to share clonal origins31. If true, then a reliable diagnosis depends on more than pathological clues to accurately differentiate these types of breast carcinomas.
    Accurate diagnosis of breast tumor types is of increasing clinical relevance, and breast carcinoma histopathology is standardly used in helping predict prognostic outcome and devising treatment strategies. Lobular cancer may be less responsive to neoadjuvant chemotherapy32333435, even when adjusted for stage36. However, these tumors may respond similarly when treated at the adjuvant level, suggesting that factors beyond tumor cell drug sensitivity may play a role in defining the different responses37. Gene expression profiling has become a common tool to distinguish subtypes of breast cancer with clinical relevance383940414243. However there are few studies which have proposed and validated a molecular assay that could distinguish ILCs from IDCs, especially as an intended clinical application. In this study, we aim to determine a robust set of genes whose expression can be used to differentiate between invasive lobular and ductal carcinomas. We propose a molecular model consisting of 46 genes that can reliably distinguish these tumor types and whose predicted diagnoses are more consistent with outcome than pathological diagnosis. Finally, cell line chemical sensitivity data is used to explore the relationship between predicted histopathological type and drug response in tumor models.
    
      Results
      A general analysis workflow is diagrammed in Fig. 1. Gene expression data from six independent cohorts were acquired for which pathologically determined lobular and ductal carcinomas had been determined, consisting of 1845 samples in total (Table 1), with three cohorts set as a discovery group (N = 653) and three cohorts for validations (N = 1192). Tumors of lobular origin accounted for 7.8–16.8% of the samples in these cohorts. Gene expression had been measured on these samples using printed oligo arrays (Affymetrix, Agilent) and RNA sequencing.
      To understand how overall lobular and ductal phenotypes relate to the underlying molecular physiology of the tumors, and to assess diversity within these histological types, we calculated the cumulative distribution from consensus matrices for clustering with 2 to 7 clusters. Consensus clustering revealed that a few clusters seem to define the expression data, with 3 clusters being the minimal reasonably stable set (Fig. 2A). Consensus clustering analysis with k = 3 (Fig. 2B) shows that though the lobular cases are not evenly distributed, no cluster clearly delineates the lobular-ductal distinction. This suggests that the molecular physiology of the cells may not always present morphological features that allow an unambiguous pathological diagnosis of lobular or ductal subtypes. To better explore for gene signatures which can define these patient subsets, we collected the raw gene expression data from the selected cohorts and an initial working gene set was defined from a shrunken centroid analysis, in which 254 genes (Supplementary Table 1) were found to partition the samples with a comparable misclassification rate as when using the complete initial set of 21023 genes (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Clustering with this set of genes (Fig. 2C) revealed that even a smaller set of genes could better distinguish lobular and ductal histologic classes. An association of GO terms to these genes found lobular associated genes are more likely to be related to cell growth, while genes positively expressed in ductal tumors are more likely to regulate cell division (Fig. 2D). An examination of the top biological processes associated with these genes reinforces this functional division (Table 2, full list of significant associations in Supplementary Table 2); the processes associated with the genes with a positive correlation with ductal diagnosis were related to cell cycle control, while processes associated the genes whose expression is positively correlated with a lobular diagnosis comprised a list of diverse functions related to cell growth and metabolism.
      To create a final model with a limited gene set, elastic-net regularized generalized linear models were used were (Supplementary Figure 1B), with a minimal error found when 46 genes were employed (listed in Supplementary Table 3). The chosen model building method used an extension of lasso modified regression, termed an elastic net, that penalizes the least square estimates and thus allows both continuous shrinkage and automatic variable selection simultaneously44. Genes and their coefficients from the model were used to define a pattern to which samples in the discovery cohorts were compared via a Pearson correlation. An optimal cutoff with a minimum misclassification error rate was determined by examining all discovery samples. Cutoff values that were statistically indistinct from the optimal cutoff were also determined via a Z test to define a ‘strict’ model, which excludes a diagnosis for samples which cannot be definitively diagnosed (Supplementary Figure 1C). As the molecular physiology between lobular and ductal subtypes may be more similar when matched for grade45, we also performed model building using only low grade samples (grades 1 or 2, which included 57 lobular cases out of 315 total). A similar model was derived, which shared 65% of the genes of the model derived using all samples, with a Pearson r of 0.90 between the models’ coefficients.
      The distribution of model scores in the discovery and test cohorts with pathological diagnosis showed a strong association (p value < 0.0001 via T-test), with similar distributions in all cohorts (Fig. 3). The model had a 94% concordance with a pathological diagnosis in the discovery cohorts given a ductal or lobular classification, and 98% concordance when indeterminate cases were excluded (the ‘strict’ model). In the validation cohorts the concordance with pathological diagnosis was 92% when all cases were compared, and 97% when indeterminate cases were excluded (Table 3). Expression data from the UNC cohort was available both measured via RNA sequencing and microarray hybridization. Concordance between both methods was very high (94% and 98% using all cases and excluding indeterminates, respectively). As the microarray hybridization provided data on more samples, this measurement was used for subsequent analysis of these cases. The fraction of cases classified as indeterminate was 14% in the discovery cohorts, and 19% in the validation cohorts (Table 3). However the two-color hybridization arrays employed for the UNC cohort had a relatively high indeterminacy rate (32%), while the RNA sequencing data for these same cases provided only 11% indeterminates, likely reflecting a greater dynamic range in the expression data. If the RNA sequencing data is used instead of the two-color array results for the UNC cohort, the indeterminancy rate in the validation cohorts is 13%, very similar to what was observed in the discovery cohort. In this set of cohorts, the indeterminates were enriched for the histopathologically defined lobular cases, as was seen in the discovery cohort. As it is known that lobular and ductal tumors are both diverse entities1439, this difference may only reflect the greater number of ductal cases available for modeling.
      The cadherin CDH1 is often used to aid in diagnosis of lobular carcinoma, as lobular breast tumors generally exhibit low expression of this gene related to inactivating mutations, which are found in over half of lobular tumors46, though are also present in some ductal tumors47. Low expression of CDH1 is therefore suggestive of a lobular diagnosis, but not indicitve4849. We compared the model predictions to CDH1 expression in the validation cohorts. CDH1 expression was compared between cohorts by mean centering and scaling the gene expression. As seen in other studies, ductal tumors exhibited a wide range of CDH1 expression values, while lobular tumors were generally low (Supplementary Figure S2A). A mixture model50 was applied to determine negative expression values for CDH1, which found 45% of lobular tumors as exhibiting low expression. Using CDH1 median value as a cutoff allowed for the correct diagnosis of 88% of lobular cases, but 52% of ductal cases were misdiagnosed (CDH1 first quartile as a cutoff allowed for 76% agreement with lobular diagnosis, and 77% agreement with ductal). The model presented in this study, which includes CDH1, allowed a range of CDH1 expression in both diagnoses (Supplementary Fig. S2B), as CDH1 expression alone is an inadequate diagnostic measure.
      Grade and tumor type are not completely independent features, ductal tumors tend to have a preponderance of higher grade cases while lobular tumors are often moderately differentiated or grade 2. This is observed in the samples studied here (Table 4). The pathological diagnosis has a greater association with grade than does the predicted subtype (t value of −5.29; 95%CI: −7.26, −3.34 vs. −3.39; 95%CI: −5.36, −1.44 via ordered logistic regression), and when pathological diagnosis and the predicted subtype are both used to model grade, only the pathological subtype retains independence. Similarly, when the predicted subtype is adjusted for grade in its association with pathologically defined tumor type via logistic regression, the model retains significance (p value < 0.001, t value of 13.49; 95%CI: 11.58, 15.51) when using all available cohorts, and also when only the validation cohort with available grade is assessed (p < 0.001, t value of 8.12; 95%CI: 6.2, 10.14). Previous studies have demonstrated that patients with lobular tumors may have improved outcome compared to ductal carcinomas, though recent studies examining lobular subtypes suggest that classical luminal lobular cancer may have worse outcomes51. Examination of 10 year breast cancer related survival and recurrence for the predicted tumor types in this study showed that lobular cases have significantly better survival than ductal cases at 10 years (Table 5, Fig. 4A,B). The pathologically defined tumor types also showed a significant association with outcome (p = 0.041). Importantly, pathologically defined ductal cases that the models predicted to be lobular also showed improved outcome compared to the ductal cases not discordantly classified (Fig. 4C,D). However, although the effect size of these discordant cases is similar to that observed in all cases, significance is not reached, possibly due to the relatively small number of cases discordantly diagnosed as lobular by the model, only 7% of cases overall are reclassified by the model, and only 3% when indeterminate predictions are allowed (Table 3). When corrected for stage and ER status, significance for the association of outcome with predicted subtype was not retained, though the hazard ratio was largely unaffected (HR = 0.2; 95%CI 0.03, 1.46 vs HR = 0.26; 95CI 0.03, 1.3). Very few lobular cases were discordantly diagnosed as ductal, and no difference in outcome is observed in this small subset (Fig. 4E,F). When 10 year recurrence free survival is examined, the model that excludes indeterminate cases again shows an apparent improved outcome of lobular cases (Fig. 4G,H), though the separation of the curves was not significant (ductal and lobular subsets and their relation to recurrence free survival are shown in Supplementary Figure 3).
      Differential response to therapy has been observed between lobular and ductal carcinomas, with lobular cancers responding poorly to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. This therapy is usually comprised of several combined drugs, often anthracycline plus or minus a taxane. To explore how the cellular molecular physiologies of lobular and ductal phenotypes identified with the model are associated with response to compounds in cell lines, we used the library of compound sensitivity created by the Developmental Therapeutics Program at the NIH employing a panel of 60 tumor cell lines (the NCI60 panel). These cell lines were classified by our models and given a lobular score (Supplementary Table 4). This was compared to growth inhibition measurements (GI50) across 20874 compounds on the same panel of cell lines. Some compounds with known clinical utility were found to be significantly associated with the model score; furthermore, when drugs were grouped by class, either by mechanism of action or by chemical composition, then significantly different correlations were also observed (Table 6, full list of compounds included in these classes shown in Supplementary Table 5). Anthracyclines, alkylating agents, particularly those at the N-7 position of guanine, and topoisomerase 1 and 2 inhibitors showed significance, and cell lines more similar to lobular tumors were predicted to be more sensitive to these compounds.
    
    
      Discussion
      The diagnosis of lobular versus other breast carcinoma types is increasingly relevant in determining appropriate clinical care, but the definition of these types remains in question, as is a clear understanding of their underlying genesis and molecular phenotypes. Differences in visual morphology, protein expression, grade, and DNA copy number and chromosomal rearrangements and mutations have all been noted as possible classifiers141516171920. Additionally, lobular carcinoma may contain molecularly distinct subgroups, making a diagnosis by pathological means alone difficult14. An inability to formulate a definitive classifier for these breast types hinders efforts to study differential response to treatment regimens and to identify novel targeted therapies. This is of special importance to invasive lobular tumors, which have been shown to respond poorly to standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy32333435. Additionally the development of disease is distinct for each tumor type, with lobular and ductal tumors exhibiting different metastatic behaviors1026. Inconsistent diagnosis could contribute to inter-institute variability in treatment efficacy and have profound impacts on the sample sizes needed for adequately powered clinical studies assessing associations between treatment and tumor type.
      As means of measuring of gene expression become standardized and expression-based classifiers are becoming common clinical tools we developed an ILC/IDC diagnostic tool based solely on the expression of only 46 genes. Previous studies have noted expression differences between ILC and IDC5 as well as a tendency of lobular cases to fall into the luminal phenotype of the intrinsic breast classification45, however no clearly defined model has been previously proposed and validated on independent cohorts. Despite ILC and IDC diagnoses comprising the majority of histopathologically defined tumors, these definitions do not explain the majority of the molecular physiology of the tumors (Fig. 2A–C). This is consistent with other studies that suggest that development of lobular and ductal carcinomas is not strictly based on origins within the breast duct system, but instead these tumor types may develop along a shared molecular pathway3045. Nonetheless, expression differences exist between the tumor types, and moreover, these differences reflect biological processes that are consistent with the observed clinical behavior of the tumors (Fig. 2D).
      An examination of significant enrichment of biological processes associated with the reduced list of 254 genes used for the model building showed that genes whose expression was positively associated with ductal tumors were more likely to be involved in regulation of cell cycle and proliferation, while lobular tumors were more associated with response to stimuli. This is consistent with the observation that ductal tumors tend to be more aggressive and are predictive of poorer outcome19, although significance was lost when adjusted for stage, ER status, or both, which may also be consistent with other studies that have shown that lobular tumors can have similar or even worse prognosis than ductal tumors when lobular subtypes are assessed51. The 46 selected genes for the final model included E-cadherin (CDH1), which has long been recognized to be differentially expressed between lobular and ductal tumors. CDH1 expression was strongly related to histologic diagnosis, but the model allowed for greater accuracy than CDH1 alone (Supplementary Fig. 2 and Table 3). The 254 working gene list showed some overlap with other genes previously noted to be differentially expressed between ILC and IDC, such as thrombospondin 4 and insulin-like growth factor 15, but the final list was largely unique. This likely reflects the complexity of the assessed phenotype.
      Comparison of the model classification to pathologist diagnosis was very good. However an inherent problem with this evaluation is weighing the meaning of discrepancies with the pathological diagnosis, as a morphological diagnosis may not be able to discern underlying molecular differences when the tumor types may share very similar lineages, even if markers like CDH1 are also employed in diagnosis. A limitation of this study is that reexamination of samples with discordant molecular and pathological diagnoses cannot be performed. However the underlying molecular physiology of a tumor may not present sufficient morphological clues to allow a pathological diagnosis that represents an accurate reflection of the tumor biology52. Therefore comparison of clinical course and relationship to other tumor classifications are important additional criteria. In this regard, it has been noted that lobular tumors are enriched for luminal A and B subtypes (43% and 15%, respectively). Among the pathologically defined lobular tumors, 58% were luminal A or luminal B, while in the model defined lobular tumors, 72% were luminal A or B (53% and 19%, respectively), though the PAM50 intrinsic breast cancer subtype classification model contains only one gene in common with the lobular ductal model proposed here (pituitary tumor-transforming 1, PTTG1). Similarly, lobular tumors are more likely to be grade I/II than ductal tumors45. This was observed in the pathologically defined tumors (Table 4). Both the pathological type and model defined type were strongly associated with grade, though pathologically defined type was the most closely associated. When the association of pathologically defined tumor type and predicted subtype is adjusted for grade, the model retains significance in all available cohorts, and also when only the validation cohort with available grade is assessed. This suggests that the model is not simply modeling grade, and the histopathological diagnosis may be more swayed by the tumor’s grade than is the molecular model.
      Differences in survival outcome between subtypes were also observed. Though ILC tends to grow more slowly19, some studies have not observed a difference in outcome53. However, ILC is more frequently diagnosed late, and stage-matched analysis has seen ILC being associated with a better outcome that IDC18, though other studies find differing results. No difference in outcome was seen between ILC and IDC when using the pathological diagnosis (data not shown), however the model-defined lobular cases had a significantly higher 10-year survival rate compared to the predicted IDC cases, though when corrected for stage and ER status, significance for the association of outcome with predicted type was not retained. The pathologically defined ductal cases that were predicted to be lobular by the model also had a very high survival rate, though the patient number was not high enough to show significance, though the hazard ratios were very similar. This suggests some cases deemed as ductal via a traditional diagnosis may contain lobular features that a pathological diagnosis may be unable to discern. Too few pathologically defined lobular cases were reassigned to determine if this is also the case for that class of tumor.
      Several studies have found that ILC is less likely to respond to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in terms of pathologic complete response than IDC and therefore neoadjuvant chemotherapy is increasingly not recommended for patients with classical ILC32333435. How to treat patients with atypical or pleomorphic lobular carcinoma is not clear. A molecular model discriminating between lobular and ductal phenotypes may help guide cell line studies exploring the sensitivity of these tumor types to different compounds. The lobular-ductal model was applied to the NCI60 panel of human tumor cell lines encompassing nine different tissues of origin, and compared to growth inhibitions measurements with relevant chemical compounds in which the concentration required to inhibit cell line growth by 50% was assayed54. The pattern of sensitivity of some compounds showed a significant correlation with the scores for the lobular-ductal model; however of possible greater meaning, when drugs were classed by mechanism or chemical class then cell lines predicted to be more lobular like were found to be more sensitive to anthracyclines (Table 6). Similarly, topoisomerase 2 inhibitors, which is the method through which anthracyclines effect tumor growth also showed a positive correlation with a predicted lobular nature. As neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer typically consists of an anthracycline and taxane-based regimens, this is in contrast to the observed clinical behavior of lobular tumors in response to anthracyclines. This could suggest that resistance of lobular tumors to these drugs may not be due to the different biochemistry of the tumor cell types, but their differential architecture, either of the tumor itself or surrounding breast tissues, or other tumor features, such as grade. Lobular tumors tend to be lower grade, and anthracycline based neoadjuvant therapy has been found to be more effective with high grade tumors55.
      Interestingly, agents which act through alkylating at N-7 position of guanine, which includes mustard and platinum compounds, also were predicted in this study to significantly inhibit growth of lobular like cells. Several individual platinum agents showed a high correlation (e.g. carboplatin) between sensitivity and a lobular-like phenotype (Supplementary Table 5). Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation has been seen to be associated with poor outcomes in high grade serous ovarian cancer, and Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation was a driver of platinum chemotherapy resistance in these cases56. Pathway analysis revealed that the classifiers used to derive the model were highly enriched for genes associated with regulation of cell proliferation (Table 2). This class of genes includes the WNT signaling pathway GO term, and several genes specifically associated with the WNT pathway were in this classification set (Supplementary Table 1). Platinum agents are typically not employed in the treatment of lobular breast cancer, however neoadjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy for the treatment of triple negative breast cancer has been found to be effective57. The biochemical relationships explored in this study are neither sufficient nor intended to suggest changes to clinical care. However, additional cell line assays examining the possible relationship between platinum agents and molecular physiologies identified by this model as associated with lobular tumor may help guide continuing research into better treatment avenues.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Gene expression datasets and processing
        We selected a total of 1845 invasive breast cancer cases in six cohorts for which expression and pathological data was publically available. The cohorts were collected by the Centre de Cancérologie de Marseille, the International Genomics Consortium, the Dana Farber Cancer Institute at Harvard University, the Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Paris, France and the University of North Carolina. Expression platforms used in for obtaining expression data included Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array, Agilent 244 K microarrays, and Illumina HiSeq RNA sequencing. Lobular tumors comprised 11% of the cohort. Three cohorts were used for discovery, and three for validation (Table 1). The three cohorts used for model building were limited to just cases unambiguously diagnosed as a ductal or lobular phenotype. The use of three cohorts for discovery and model building, employing different pathologists to perform histological subtyping, provided a heterogeneously defined population, which should aid in the creation of diagnostic models representative of a consensus definition of lobular and ductal subtypes. All provided samples were used in this analysis providing that they gave a diagnosis of lobular or ductal carcinoma and had available expression data. Raw hybridization array expression data was downloaded and normalized via Robust Multi-array Averaging and was log transformed. The three discovery cohorts were mean adjusted to remove batch effects.
      
      
        Estimates of data distribution
        To get an initial assessment of how molecular diversity within the cohorts related to lobular and ductal status, cluster robustness was assessed by consensus clustering using agglomerative k-means clustering with hierarchical clustering with Pearson correlation, with a maximum k = 7. The minimum number of stable clusters was assessed by plotting the cumulative distribution, defined as when an increase in cluster number does not lead to significant increase in the cumulative distribution function. Clustering was performed for both genes and samples using hierarchical clustering with an uncentered correlation similarity metric.
      
      
        Feature reduction and model building
        A derivation of a minimal gene set for model building was performed by shrunken centroid analysis58, which fits a nearest shrunken centroid classifier to the gene expression data. Cross validation was used to estimate the error of the shrunken centroid classifier, and a centroid was chosen using the minimal gene set before classification error of lobular cancers began to increase, resulting in a working gene set of 254 genes. Elastic-net regularized linear modeling was used to identify a final model classifying the histologic types of ductal and lobular, with 10-fold cross validation performed using a binomial model to determine the tuning parameter lambda that gave a minimum mean cross-validated error, which was then used for the predictive model44. A final model was derived comprised of 46 genes (Supplementary Table 3). To exclude cases for which a diagnosis may not be definitively diagnosed, cutoff values that identified a range of predictions that are statistically indistinct from the optimal cutoff were also determined via a Z test. This was termed the ‘strict’ model.
      
      
        Gene annotation and model assessment
        Pathway analysis of the 254 shrunken centroid defined genes was performed with Cytoscape using the ClueGO tools5960. This analysis allows visualization of networks of the model genes and biological processes that have been grouped with kappa statistics by similar associated genes to reduce redundancy of similar processes. Enrichment of these grouped gene ontology biological processes and KEGG terms were assessed using a step down Bonferroni correction to the alpha value. In the assessment of predicted class and their association with outcome, the likelihood ratio test was used in univariate analyses, and the Wald test for multivariate models. All p values are presented as two sided, with a value of less than 0.05 being considered significant.
      
      
        Cell line sensitivity screen
        The NIH Development Therapeutics Program’s (dtp.cancer.gov) NCI60 tumor cell line growth inhibition screen was used to compare the predicted lobular nature of the cell lines in the panel to sensitivity of relevant compounds. The expression data from Affymetrex U133 Plus 2.0 chips was normalized using GC-Robust Multi-array Averaging. Lobular-ductal model scores were derived and correlated with compound sensitivity using CellMiner (discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer)61.
      
    
    
      Additional Information
      How to cite this article: Fu, D. et al. Molecular Classification of Lobular Carcinoma of the Breast. Sci. Rep.
7, 43265; doi: 10.1038/srep43265 (2017).
      Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    
    
      Supplementary Material
      
        
          Supplementary Information
        
        
      
    
  
        
          Background
          Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver malignancy worldwide. However, present studies of its multiple gene interaction and cellular pathways still could not explain the initiation and development of HCC perfectly. To find the key genes and miRNAs as well as their potential molecular mechanisms in HCC, microarray data GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958 were analyzed.
        
        
          Methods
          The microarray datasets GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958, including mRNA and miRNA profiles, were downloaded from the GEO database and were analyzed using GEO2R. Functional and pathway enrichment analyses were performed using the DAVID database, and the protein–protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using the Cytoscape software. Finally, miRDB was applied to predict the targets of the differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs).
        
        
          Results
          A total of 115 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were found in HCC, including 52 up-regulated genes and 63 down-regulated genes. The gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses from DAVID showed that up-regulated genes were significantly enriched in chromosome segregation and cell division, while the down-regulated genes were mainly involved in complement activation, protein activation cascades, carboxylic acid metabolic processes, oxoacid metabolic processes, and the immune response. From the PPI network, the 18 nodes with the highest degree were screened as hub genes. Among them, ESR1 was found to have close interactions with FOXO1, CXCL12, and GNAO1. In addition, a total of 64 DEMs were identified, which included 58 up-regulated miRNAs and 6 down-regulated miRNAs. ESR1 was potentially targeted by five miRNAs, including hsa-mir-18a and hsa-mir-221.
        
        
          Conclusions
          The roles of DEMs like hsa-mir-221 in HCC through interactions with DEGs such as ESR1 and CXCL12 may provide new clues for the diagnosis and treatment of HCC patients.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12957-017-1127-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      HCC is the most common primary liver malignancy and is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths around the world. In Asia, there are more than 580,000 new cases expected every year [1]. As well as other carcinomas, gene aberrations, cellular context, and environmental influences are believed to be the reason of the occurrence, progression, and metastasis of HCC. Although the study of the multiple genes and cellular pathways that take part in the initiation and development of HCC has been discussed for many years, the therapy for HCC accurately still remains scarcely. Accordingly, it is crucial to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion of HCC for the improvement of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
      In recent years, the microarray, a high-throughput platform for analysis of gene expression, has been extensively conducted as an efficient tool for the identification of general genetic alteration during tumorigenesis [2]. While studies of DEGs and DEMs of HCC have been performed in the past decades and some of their functions in different pathways, biological processes, or molecular functions have been reported, there remain questions about how the DEGs and microRNAs interact through molecular pathways because of limitations on the comparative analysis of the DEGs in independent studies. Currently, due to bioinformatics methods, we can finally deal with the data generated by microarray technology and find the interactions among DEGs and microRNAs, especially the pathways in the interaction network, to conclude their potential mechanisms in HCC.
      In this study, we chose three gene expression profiles (GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958), which were downloaded from the GEO database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), to obtain DEGs and DEMs between liver cancer tissues and normal tissue samples. Then, functional enrichment and network analyses were applied to identify the DEGs, which were combined with mRNA–microRNA interaction analysis, to describe the key genes and miRNAs as well as their potential molecular mechanisms in HCC.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Collection and inclusion criteria of studies
        We searched the GEO database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) for publicly available studies from January 1, 2010 to October 30, 2016 using the following keywords: “hepatocellular carcinoma” (study keyword), “Homo sapiens” (organism), “Expression profiling by array” (study type), “70 to 3000” (sample count) and “tissue” (attribute name). After a systematic review, 13 GSE studies were retrieved. The inclusion criteria for studies were as follows: (1) samples diagnosed with HCC tissue samples and normal tissue samples, (2) gene expression profiling of mRNA, (3) sample count of each group are more than 35, and (4) sufficient information to perform the analysis. Then, three gene expression profiles (GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958) were collected for analysis.
      
      
        Microarray data
        Three gene expression profiles (GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958) were downloaded from the GEO database. The array data for GSE25097 included 268 HCC tissue samples and 243 normal tissue samples [3]. The array data for GSE57958 consisted of 39 HCC tissue samples and 39 normal tissue samples [4]. The array data for GSE22058 consisted of one mRNA expression profile (including 100 HCC tissue samples and 97 normal tissue samples) and a miRNA expression profile (including 96 HCC tissue samples and 96 normal tissue samples) [5].
      
      
        Data processing
        GEO2R (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/) is an interactive web tool for comparing two groups of data that can analyze any GEO series [6]. GEO2R was applied to screen differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs between HCC and normal tissue samples. The adjusted P values (adj. P) using Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) false discovery rate (FDR) method by default were applied to correct for the occurrence of false positive results. An adj. P < 0.05 and a |logFC| ≥ 1 were set as the cut-off criteria. Heat map of DEGs was generated using the online tool Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/).
      
      
        Functional and pathway enrichment analysis
        Gene ontology (GO) is a common method for annotating genes, gene products and sequences to underlying biological phenomena [7, 8]; the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) is an integrated database resource for biological interpretation of genome sequences and other high-throughput data [9]. Both analyses were available in the DAVID database (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), which is a bioinformatics data resource composed of an integrated biology knowledge base and analysis tools to extract meaningful biological information from large quantities of genes and protein collections [10]. GO and KEGG analyses were performed using the DAVID database to identify DEGs. A P value <0.05 was set as the cut-off criterion.
      
      
        PPI network construction and analysis of modules
        The STRING database (http://string-db.org/) is an online software that aims to provide a critical assessment and integration of protein–protein interactions, including direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations [11]. Cytoscape is a popular open-source software tool for the visual exploration of biomolecule interaction networks composed of protein, gene, and other types of interactions [12]. The DEGs were mapped to STRING to evaluate the PPI information and then visualized with Cytoscape. A combined score >0.15 was set as the cut-off criterion. To screen the hub genes, node degree ≥10 was set as the cut-off criterion. Then, the Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) plug-in was used to screen modules of hub genes from the PPI network with degree cut-off = 10, haircut on, node score cut-off = 0.2, k-core = 2, and max. depth = 100. Moreover, the functional and pathway enrichment analyses of DEGs in each module were performed by DAVID. A P value <0.05 was set as the cut-off criterion.
      
      
        Prediction of miRNA targets
        The target genes of the DEMs from GSE22058 were predicted with miRDB (http://mirdb.org/miRDB/), which is an online database for predicting microRNA targets [13]. The target genes were aligned with the DEGs to obtain an intersection for further analysis.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Identification of DEGs
        A total of 2021, 1097, and 409 DEGs were identified after the analyses of the GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958 datasets, respectively (Additional files 1, 2, and 3). Among them, 116 genes were found in all three datasets (Fig. 1). Of these, 115 gene expressions were matched, including 52 up-regulated genes and 63 down-regulated genes in HCC tissue samples compared with normal liver tissue samples.Fig. 1Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in mRNA expression profiling datasets GSE22058, GSE25097, and GSE57958

      
      
        Functional and pathway enrichment analyses
        To further understand the function and mechanism of the identified DEGs, functional and pathway enrichment analyses, including GO and KEGG, were performed using DAVID. The GO term enrichment analysis showed that in the biological processes-associated category, the up-regulated genes were significantly enriched in chromosome segregation and cell division, while the down-regulated genes were mainly involved in complement activation, protein activation cascades, carboxylic acid metabolic processes, oxoacid metabolic processes, and the immune response (Table 1). In addition, cell component analysis showed that the up-regulated genes were enriched in the chromosome, cytosol, proteinaceous extracellular matrix, and basement membrane collagen trimer, and that the down-regulated genes were mainly found in the collagen trimer, blood microparticles, membrane attack complexes, membrane-bounded vesicles, and the extracellular region part (Table 1). Moreover, for molecular function, the up-regulated genes were enriched in histone deacetylase binding, and the down-regulated genes were enriched in steroid binding, aromatase activity, oxidoreductase activity, monooxygenase activity, and serine-type endopeptidase activity (Table 1). Furthermore, the KEGG pathway analysis showed that the up-regulated genes were significantly enriched in ECM-receptor interaction, while four pathways were overrepresented in the down-regulated genes: chemical carcinogenesis, steroid hormone biosynthesis, retinol metabolism, and drug metabolism—cytochrome P450 (Table 1).Table 1Functional and pathway enrichment analysis of up-regulated and down-regulated genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissueCategoryTermCount%
P ValueUp-regulated GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0007059 ~ chromosome segregation917.62.66E-06 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0098813 ~ nuclear chromosome segregation815.71.06E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0000819 ~ sister chromatid segregation713.72.91E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0051301 ~ cell division917.61.31E-04 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0007067 ~ mitotic nuclear division815.71.44E-04 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0000793 ~ condensed chromosome59.82.14E-03 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005829 ~ cytosol1835.33.98E-03 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005578 ~ proteinaceous extracellular matrix59.81.51E-02 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0098651 ~ basement membrane collagen trimer23.92.08E-02 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005694 ~ chromosome713.73.38E-02 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0042826 ~ histone deacetylase binding35.93.03E-02 KEGG_PATHWAYhsa04512:ECM-receptor interaction35.91.68E-02Down-regulated GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0006956 ~ complement activation610.01.83E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0072376 ~ protein activation cascade610.06.43E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0019752 ~ carboxylic acid metabolic process1220.08.21E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0043436 ~ oxoacid metabolic process1220.08.66E-05 GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0006955 ~ immune response1626.71.23E-04 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005581 ~ collagen trimer46.77.15E-03 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0072562 ~ blood microparticle46.71.91E-02 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005579 ~ membrane attack complex23.32.67E-02 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0031988 ~ membrane-bounded vesicle2135.04.60E-02 GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0044421 ~ extracellular region part2236.75.00E-02 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0005496 ~ steroid binding46.73.47E-03 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0070330 ~ aromatase activity35.03.57E-03 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0016712 ~ oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced flavin or flavoprotein as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen35.04.11E-03 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0004497 ~ monooxygenase activity46.74.77E-03 GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0004252 ~ serine-type endopeptidase activity58.37.38E-03 KEGG_PATHWAYhsa05204:Chemical carcinogenesis610.04.53E-05 KEGG_PATHWAYhsa00140:Steroid hormone biosynthesis46.73.04E-03 KEGG_PATHWAYhsa00830:Retinol metabolism46.74.19E-03 KEGG_PATHWAYhsa00982:Drug metabolism - cytochrome P45046.74.76E-03Count: the number of enriched genes in each termIf there were more than five terms enriched in this category, the top five terms were selected per the P value

      
      
        PPI network construction and analysis of modules
        Ninety-seven nodes and 319 edges were mapped in the PPI network of identified DEGs, including 43 up-regulated genes and 54 down-regulated genes (Fig. 2a). The 18 nodes with the higher degrees were screened as hub genes, including TOP2A, FOS, TK1, CDC20, ESR1, CCNB2, CXCL12, FOXO1, HMMR, VWF, ACSM3, COL4A1, ZIC2, RFC4, TXNRD1, GNAO1, CYP3A4, and RAP2A (Table 2). Hub genes expression heat map in GSE25097 is shown in Fig. 2c. Among these, ESR1 was found to have close interactions with FOS, FOXO1, CXCL12, and GNAO1; CDC20 had interactions with CCNB2, CDCA5, CENPM, and GMNN (combined score > 0.90). A significant module including 16 nodes and 58 edges was obtained using MCODE (Fig. 2b). GO term enrichment analysis showed that in biological processes, the genes in this module were mainly associated with the cell cycle and responses to oxidation reactions and steroid hormones (Table 3). The genes were significantly enriched in the nucleoplasm, cytosol, and chromosome by cell component analysis (Table 3). The molecular function analysis showed that the genes were mainly involved in the binding of macromolecular complexes, chromatin, enzymes, RNA polymerases, and carbohydrate derivatives (Table 3). The KEGG analysis showed that the genes were mainly enriched in ECM-receptor interactions (Table 3).Fig. 2Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network and hub genes. a PPI network of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). b A significant module selected from the PPI network. Red nodes denote up-regulated genes, while green nodes denote down-regulated genes. Black border shows that the gene is a potential target for differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs). The lines represent an interaction relationship between the nodes. c Hub genes expression heat map (11 up-regulated genes and 7 down-regulated genes) in GSE25097. Red: up-regulation; purple: down-regulation
Table 2Hub genes and their related DEMsGene symbolNode degreeRelated DEMsTOP2A30noneFOS27hsa-miR-221TK124noneCDC2023noneESR121hsa-miR-148b, hsa-miR-221, hsa-miR-18a, hsa-miR-181b, hsa-miR-19aCCNB218noneCXCL1217hsa-miR-221FOXO116hsa-miR-135b, hsa-miR-324-3p, hsa-miR-369-3pHMMR15noneVWF15noneACSM314noneCOL4A114noneZIC214noneRFC413noneTXNRD113noneGNAO112hsa-miR-193aCYP3A410noneRAP2A10noneOnly top 18 DEGs with higher node degrees were showed in this table. Node degree: the number of edges incident to the node; Related miRNAs: miRNAs may potentially target the gene
Table 3Functional and pathway enrichment analysis of the genes in the moduleCategoryTermCount%
P ValueGOTERM_BP_FATGO:0000302 ~ response to reactive oxygen species426.78.25E-04GOTERM_BP_FATGO:1901700 ~ response to oxygen-containing compound746.71.06E-03GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0006979 ~ response to oxidative stress426.74.59E-03GOTERM_BP_FATGO:0048545 ~ response to steroid hormone426.74.78E-03GOTERM_BP_FATGO:1903047 ~ mitotic cell cycle process533.35.21E-03GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005654 ~ nucleoplasm960.01.54E-03GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005829 ~ cytosol853.31.94E-02GOTERM_CC_FATGO:0005694 ~ chromosome426.74.75E-02GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0044877 ~ macromolecular complex binding960.04.65E-06GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0003682 ~ chromatin binding640.05.72E-05GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0019899 ~ enzyme binding640.01.67E-02GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0000982 ~ transcription factor activity, RNA polymer320.03.72E-02GOTERM_MF_FATGO:0097367 ~ carbohydrate derivative binding640.04.13E-02KEGG_PATHWAYhsa04512:ECM-receptor interaction320.09.53E-03Count: the number of enriched genes in each termIf there were more than five terms enriched in this category, the top five terms were selected per the P value

      
      
        miRNA-DEG pairs
        A total number of 64 DEMs between HCC tissue samples and normal tissue samples were identified after the analyses of the GSE22058 datasets (Additional file 4), including 58 up-regulated miRNAs and 6 down-regulated miRNAs (Fig. 3). The miRDB database was used to predict target genes of the identified DEMs (Table 4). By comparing the target gene to the DEGs, we screened the genes with a consistent expression trend for further analysis. miRNA-221, one of the most significantly up-regulated miRNAs, was found to target ESR1, FOS, and CXCL12. In addition, miRNA-142-5p, one of the main down-regulated miRNAs, potentially targeted ANKRD29, IGF2BP3, and IGSF3. Moreover, we found that ESR1 was potentially targeted by five miRNAs, including hsa-mir-148b, hsa-mir-181b, hsa-mir-18a, hsa-mir-19a, and hsa-mir-221 (Table 2). In addition, FOXO1 was the potential target of hsa-mir-135b, hsa-mir-324, and hsa-mir-369.Fig. 3Heat map of the differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) (58 up-regulated genes and 6 down-regulated genes). Red: up-regulation; purple: down-regulation
Table 4DEMs in HCC tissue and their potential target genesmiRNAAdj. P
logFCTarget geneshsa-mir-106b1.94E-411.49ANKRD29, IL1RAP, ADARB1, ARID4B, EPHA4, FBXL5, PDCD1LG2, PKD2, PTPN4, SLC40A1hsa-mir-148b9.59E-221.37ESR1, ABCB7, B4GALT6, CDK19, LDLR, MXD1, NPTN, RPS6KA5, SOS2, SZRD1hsa-mir-1512.61E-211.14AGO2, ZFAND5, CLK1, AQP4, CASD1, RPS6KA5, FAM104A, NAA15, YTHDF3, HIF1Ahsa-mir-2217.37E-211.66ESR1, FOS, CXCL12, CDKN1B, GABRA1, PANK3, TCF12, HECTD2, RFX7, TMCC1hsa-mir-18a2.16E-202.48ESR1, NEDD9, BBX, INADL, MAP7D1, PHF19, RORA, ZBTB47, CDK19, DICER1hsa-mir-200b4.50E-17−3.15MAGEC2, ESM1, TCEB1, TRIM33, LHFP, PTPN21, ARHGAP6, VASH2, HIPK3, NR5A2hsa-mir-2244.85E-15−71.38NRCAM, CPNE8, ZNF207, ACSL4, RNF144B, SH3KBP1, RNF38, SLC4A4, GPR158, GGNBP2hsa-mir-200a5.03E-14−2.29COL15A1, MYBL1, ZEB2, ATP8A1, DCP2, TMEM170B, ZBTB34, DUSP3, TRHDE, RSAD2hsa-mir-1821.41E-06−2.69NRCAM, ABHD13, MFAP3, PCNX, NADK2, CAMSAP2, SLC39A9, NCALD, ANK3, HOXA9hsa-mir-142-5p6.59E-06−1.49ANKRD29, IGF2BP3, IGSF3, ZFP36, ZFPM2, BAI3, AFF4, DIAPH2, AHR, ARID4B
Adj. P: adjusted P value, FC: fold changePositive logFC values denote up-regulated miRNAs, while negative logFC values denote down-regulated miRNAs. If there were more than ten genes predicted by miRDB, only ten genes were listed in the table

      
    
    
      Discussion
      Although people have continuously studied HCC, the early diagnosis and treatment of HCC is still a large problem due to the lack of understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive the occurrence and development of HCC. Therefore, in-depth research into the factors and mechanisms of HCC progression are necessary for HCC diagnosis and treatment. Due to well-developed microarray technology, it is easier to determine the general genetic alterations in the progression of diseases, which can allow for the identification of gene targets for diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis of tumors.
      In our study, a total of 115 DEGs were screened, including 52 up-regulated genes and 63 down-regulated genes. The up-regulated genes were enriched in chromosome segregation and cell division, while the down-regulated genes were mainly involved in complement activation, protein activation cascades, carboxylic acid metabolic processes, oxoacid metabolic processes, and the immune response. Moreover, by constructing the PPI, we identified high degree genes including ESR1, which was found to have close interactions with FOXO1, FOS, CXCL12, and GNAO1.
      ESR1 could encode the transcription factor that enhances the response to various stimuli such as estrogen and growth factors in different kinds of tissue types [14]. Some researchers noticed that it may play a potential tumor suppressor features in HCC with its novel associations among the hepatocyte-specific pathways [15]. Moreover, there are also some reports claiming that ESR1 could suppress the inflammatory process mediated by interleukin-6 and reduce hepatic injury and the compensatory proliferation of hepatocytes [16]. Recent research has shown that cancers such as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) also have very low-expression level of ESR1 [17]. FOXO, which has four members including FOXO1, is one of the 19 kinds of forkhead box transcription factors and is mainly express in mammals [18, 19]. Reports showed that the overexpression of FOXO could inhibit the growth and size of tumors [18, 20]. Some research on breast cancer also claimed that when FOXO proteins accumulate in the nucleus, they could suspend cell cycle progression and promote apoptosis [20, 21]. Recent research on FOXO proteins provides a new viewpoint that they may possess antitumor properties in HCC, inducing the expression of pro-apoptotic genes and interfering with signaling cascades, such as the Wnt/β-catenin, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, or MAPK pathways that are commonly changed in HCC [21, 22]. Meanwhile, FOS is reported as an oncogene in several kinds of cancers such as bladder cancer and HCC [23, 24]. There is also a recent research that shows that FOS has a high expression in HCC cell lines [25]. Yet in this work, we found it as a low-expression hub gene through the Microarray data analysis. Therefore it may need a further test in the future experiments and is excluded from the work this time. However, the molecular mechanism of ESR1 for HCC and the relationship of ESR1 and FOXO1 were rarely explored. In our study, we found that ESR1 and FOXO1 both had low-expression levels and had an interaction, indicating a joint function in HCC.
      Stromal-derived factor 1 alpha, also known as CXCL12, is a specific ligand for CXCR4 and CXCR7. These three proteins together drive the migration of progenitor cells in embryonic development. Some invasion-related or metastasis-related pathways, such as cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and axon guidance, contain CXCL12 as an important role in the regulation of themselves [26]. Several studies have shown that CXCL12 has a lower expression level in HCC tissue than in normal liver tissue [27]. There is also a study showing that CXCL12 and CXR4 may play significant roles in the metastasis of HCC by promoting the migration of tumor cells [28]. GNAO1 is a member of the subunit family of Gα proteins. As a molecular switch that controls signal transduction, the deregulation of GNAO1 can facilitate oncogenesis [29]. Kan et al. found that the role of mutant GNAO1 in oncogenesis might be to act as a tumor suppressor gene [30]. Jia et al. combined an integrated CNA (chromosomal copy number alteration) analysis with gene expression data to demonstrate that GNAO1 may play a key role in the pathogenesis of HCC [31]. Meanwhile, some research has shown that GNAO1 also plays a significant role in breast cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma [32]. Above all, these results suggest that ESR1, FOXO1, CXCL12, and GNAO1 are involved in the pathogenesis of carcinoma by affecting cell division, complement activation, and protein activation cascades, which support our findings.
      Increasing evidence has shown that the dysregulation of miRNAs is an important part of the pathogenesis of multiple cancer types, including HCC. In our study, we identified 64 DEMs, including 58 up-regulated and 6 down-regulated miRNAs in HCC. miR-221 is one of the most significantly up-regulated miRNAs and was found to target ESR1, FOS, and CXCL12. Additionally, miRNA-142-5p is the main down-regulated miRNA and potentially targets ANKRD29, IGF2BP3, and IGSF3. A recent report shows that miRNA-142-5p could regulate the expression of IGF2BP3, which is strongly associated with an advanced tumor stage and is a predictor of poor prognosis among patients with HCC, as with IGF2BP1 [33]. miR-221, which is one of the most frequently and consistently up-regulated microRNAs (miRNAs) in human cancer, has been suggested to act as a tumor promoter. A recent study presents that miR-221 overexpression could accelerate hepatocyte proliferation and contribute to liver tumorigenesis [34]. Additionally, miR-221 also had a higher expression level in NSCLC [35]. Further researches give a conclusion that through the stimulation from staphylococcal nuclease domain-containing 1 (SND1), miR-221 could result in the overexpression of angiogenic factors like angiogenin and CXCL16 [36]. By using parallel measurement, a change in CDKN1B, CDKN1C, paralemmin-2, and CXCL12 levels was suggested as consistent with increased miR-221 activity in the same group. Meanwhile, Yau et al. found that miR-221 and miR-18a levels were also significantly higher in colorectal carcinoma tissues compared with their respective adjacent normal tissues [37]. miR-18a and miR-19a, regulated by E2F-MYC signaling pathways, are reported playing a crucial role in inducing cell proliferation [38]. As we found that ESR1 was potentially targeted by hsa-mir-148b, hsa-mir-181b, hsa-mir-18a, hsa-mir-19a, and hsa-mir-221, it indicates that these miRNAs may play a key role in HCC by mediating ESR1.
    
    
      Conclusions
      In conclusion, our study tried to identify DEGs using comprehensive bioinformatics analyses and found potential biomarkers to predict the progression of diseases. After analysis, a total of 115 DEGs and 64 DEMs were screened including ESR1, FOXO1, CXCL12, GNAO1, and several miRNAs such as miR-221 and miR-142-5p. Significantly, the roles of hsa-mir-148b, hsa-mir-181b, hsa-mir-18a, hsa-mir-19a, and hsa-mir-221 in HCC through interactions with ESR1 and CXCL12 may provide new clues for the diagnosis and treatment of HCC patients. However, lacking of experimental verification is a limitation of this study. In the future, these predicted results obtained from bioinformatics analysis can be verified by further experimental researches, such as qRT-PCR and Western Blot.
    
  
        Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease that lacks a predictive and broadly applicable biomarker. Continued focus on mutation-specific upstream mechanisms has yet to predict disease progression in the clinic. Utilising cellular pathology common to the majority of ALS patients, we implemented an objective transcriptome-driven approach to develop noninvasive prognostic biomarkers for disease progression. Genes expressed in laser captured motor neurons in direct correlation (Spearman rank correlation, p < 0.01) with counts of neuropathology were developed into co-expression network modules. Screening modules using three gene sets representing rate of disease progression and upstream genetic association with ALS led to the prioritisation of a single module enriched for immune response to motor neuron degeneration. Genes in the network module are important for microglial activation and predict disease progression in genetically heterogeneous ALS cohorts: Expression of three genes in peripheral lymphocytes - LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD – differentiate patients with rapid and slowly progressive disease, suggesting promise as a blood-derived biomarker. TREM2 is a member of the network module and the level of soluble TREM2 protein in cerebrospinal fluid is shown to predict survival when measured in late stage disease (Spearman rank correlation, p = 0.01). Our data-driven systems approach has, for the first time, directly linked microglia to the development of motor neuron pathology. LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD represent peripherally accessible candidate biomarkers and TREM2 provides a broadly applicable therapeutic target for ALS.
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40478-017-0424-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Introduction
      Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease without effective treatment or a predictive biomarker [50]. Progressive motor neuron loss leads to a median survival of only 32 months, with death most often the result of respiratory failure [42]. A useful non-invasive biomarker for ALS progression should anticipate disease severity in advance, be broadly applicable independent of genetic background, and should provide a basis for therapeutic intervention. Many biomarkers in development currently are potentially limited because they are phenomenological including electrophysiological [14], imaging [19], clinical [41] and fluid-based [29] measures. Other upstream markers are specific to relatively rare genetic variants e.g. RNA foci and dipeptide-repeat proteins in C9ORF72-ALS [8, 30].
      Data-driven methods employing transcriptomics have successfully identified biomarkers in other clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease states, including breast and gastric cancers, psoriasis and progressive supranuclear palsy [26, 43, 48, 54]. To achieve a similar goal we planned an approach with a discovery phase followed by a biomarker phase. In the discovery phase, we utilised a systematic, data-driven approach to discover and prioritise modules of tightly co-expressed genes relevant to ALS pathogenesis (Fig. 1a–c). In the biomarker assessment phase we tested the capability of top performing modules as a biomarker (s) when measured in accessible tissue (Fig. 1d).Fig. 1Data-driven discovery workflow. Using anterior horn tissue, RNA transcript expression was measured from isolated motor neurons, and counts of p62-positive cytoplasmic inclusions within motor neurons were conducted. RNA expression and pathology counts from the same patients were correlated by Spearman’s rank correlation to identify 83 transcripts (a). Pathology correlated transcripts seeded co-expressed networks. The resulting combined network was developed into tightly co-expressing modules using weighted gene co-expression analysis (WGCNA) (b). Modules were prioritised using enrichment with independently curated gene lists related to ALS rate of progression and ALS genetic susceptibility. The two top scoring modules were enriched for neuronal and immune function respectively. MN = motor neuron, LB = lymphoblastoid (c). The immune module was selected for use as a biomarker in peripheral tissue and additional non-tissue specific genes were added. Components of the immune module were assessed by mRNA and protein quantification for predictive value in blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (d)

      In order to deconstruct central nervous system (CNS) pathophysiology, studies have concentrated on a single dysfunctional feature, an approach that may not yield sufficiently broad insights into global disease mechanisms. An advantage of a global transcriptome-based analysis is the capacity to exhaustively describe a biological system without prior information [28]. Integrating transcriptome profiling with measurement of a disease-specific covariate reveals the contribution of individual genes to pathogenesis [22]. Extending this concept to the level of networks of interacting genes rather than isolated genes provides further physiological insight [17].
      The aim of our approach is to develop non-invasive, broadly applicable prognostic biomarkers for ALS disease progression. Although ALS is markedly heterogeneous both genetically and phenotypically, more than 98% of ALS patients develop p62- and TDP-43-positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions within degenerating motor neurons [33]. Post-mortem studies have indicated that the frequency of neuronal TDP-43-positive cytoplasmic aggregates predicts the severity of neurodegeneration in a region-specific manner [2]. We selected motor neuron pathology as a covariate measure of disease severity which could potentially be used to identify important, broadly applicable, transcriptome changes related to outcome.
      To maximize signal from the relevant affected system, gene expression profiling was performed on laser captured motor neurons from ALS patients. Genes correlated in their levels of expression with motor neuron pathology were then developed into co-expression network modules which were filtered and prioritised based on independently curated markers of ALS biology: gene sets related to rate of progression and upstream genetic association with ALS. In the discovery phase (Fig. 1a–c) our systematic approach led to identification of two gene modules enriched with ALS biology. Functional enrichment within the top scoring network module revealed genes which encode an immune response to motor neuron pathology; the majority of these genes are expressed by microglia.
      Gene expression within the CNS has been observed in peripheral tissues [18, 22] so in the biomarker assessment phase (Fig. 1d) of our analysis, we explored the possibility that our modules, generated from CNS tissue, may include genes with tissue-independent ability to predict disease severity. Components of the immune module were assessed by mRNA and protein quantification in accessible tissues such as blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). We demonstrate candidate biomarkers that provide insight into potential therapeutic targets.
    
    
      Materials and methods
      
        Laser captured motor neurons
        Brain and spinal cord tissue from fourteen ALS patients was obtained from the Sheffield Brain Tissue Bank (Table 1). Seven of these patients carried a hexanucleotide repeat expansion of C9ORF72 and seven patients suffered sporadic ALS with no identified pathogenic mutation. C9ORF72-ALS samples were identified by repeat-primed PCR of the C9ORF72 gene [9]. Common mutations in C9ORF72, TARDBP, FUS, CHMP2B and SOD1 were excluded in the sporadic ALS patients. Tissue donated for research was obtained with written informed consent from the next of kin, and in accordance with the UK Human Tissue Authority guidelines on tissue donation. The work was approved by the South Yorkshire Ethics Committee.Table 1Clinical information relating to motor neurons laser captured from ALS patientsIDGenderAge at onset (years)Disease duration (years)Site of onset
C9ORF72 statusFamilial/Sporadic1M702.17Limb+Familial2M661.17Bulbar+Familial3F563.58Limb+Familial4F613.33Bulbar+Sporadic5F580.58Limb+Sporadic6M621.67Bulbar+Sporadic7F613.50Limb+Sporadic8M603.17Limb-Sporadic9M710.75Limb-Sporadic10M492.42Limb-Sporadic11M745.25Limb-Sporadic12M714.00Limb-Sporadic13M693.92Limb-Sporadic14M502.08Limb-SporadicC9ORF72 status indicates the presence (+) or absence (-) of a GGGGCC-repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene
M Male, F Female

        Spinal cord sections from the limb enlargements were collected postmortem, processed according to standard protocols [21], and stored at −80 °C until required. Cervical spinal cord sections were prepared, between 800 and 1200 motor neurons were isolated, and RNA was extracted using methods described previously [15]. RNA quantity and quality was assessed on the Nanodrop spectrophotometer and Agilent Bioanalyser, respectively, to ensure all samples were of comparable and sufficient quality to proceed. RNA (20–25 ng) was linearly amplified using the Affymetrix Two Cycle cDNA synthesis protocol to produce biotin-labelled copy RNA. Copy RNA (15 μg) was fragmented for 15 min and hybridized to the Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChips, according to Affymetrix protocols. Array washing and staining was performed in the GeneChip® fluidics station 400 and arrays were scanned on the GeneChip® 3000 scanner. GeneChip® Operating Software was used to generate signal intensities for each transcript.
      
      
        Lymphoblastoid cell lines
        Lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from 46 Caucasian ALS patients, all of Northern European descent, were obtained from the UK Motor Neurone Disease Association DNA Bank (Table 2). C9ORF72-ALS samples were identified by repeat-primed PCR of the C9ORF72 gene [9]. All samples were collected with written informed consent from the donor, and the work was approved by the South Yorkshire Ethics Committee.Table 2Clinical information relating to lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from ALS patientsIDGenderAge at onset (years)Disease duration (years)Site of onset
C9ORF72 statusFamilial/Sporadic1F281.10Bulbar+Familial2F571.21Mixed+Familial3F620.17Bulbar+Familial4M59<1 yearN/A+Familial5M631.71Mixed+Familial6M471.63Limb+Familial7F510.97Bulbar+Familial8M601.15Bulbar+Sporadic9M681.56Limb+Sporadic10F371.74Limb+Sporadic11M562.20Limb+Sporadic12M451.47Limb+Sporadic13M720.52Limb+Sporadic14F581.33Mixed+Sporadic15M471.57Limb+Sporadic16M640.66Limb+Sporadic17M621.96Limb+Sporadic18M651.40Limb+Sporadic19F69>4 yearsLimb+Familial20M63>5 yearsLimb+Familial21F646.92Limb+Familial22F564.14Limb+Familial23F724.66Limb+Sporadic24F485.95Limb+Sporadic25F374.50Bulbar+Sporadic26M61~4 yearsMixed+Sporadic27M440.94Mixed-Sporadic28M545.90Limb-Sporadic29M725.99Limb-Sporadic30M760.85Limb-Sporadic31F761.08Bulbar-Sporadic32F651.10Limb-Sporadic33M657.70Limb-Sporadic34M490.39Limb-Sporadic35M326.05Limb-Sporadic36M356.85Limb-Sporadic37F620.73Bulbar-Sporadic38F586.02Limb-Sporadic39M660.85Limb-Sporadic40M826.67Limb-Sporadic41F750.89Limb-Sporadic42M490.70Limb-Sporadic43F686.17Limb-Sporadic44F626.69Limb-Sporadic45M717.12Limb-Sporadic46M861.04Limb-SporadicC9ORF72 status indicates the presence (+) or absence (-) of a GGGGCC-repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene
M Male, F Female

        Total RNA was extracted from ALS patient and control-derived lymphoblastoid cell lines using QIAGEN’s RNeasy® Mini Kit following the manufacturer’s recommendations. A 75 μL LCL suspension, containing approximately 5x106 cells, typically yields between 1.9 and 13.6 μg total RNA with a mean concentration of approximately 170 ng/μl as assessed the by the NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The quality of the isolated material was analysed using the 2100 bioanalyzer with an RNA 6000 Nano LabChip® Kit (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). Linear amplification of RNA with an input of approximately 300 ng of starting material was performed using the Ambion® Whole Transcript (WT) Expression Assay (Applied Biosystems) and Affymetrix GeneChip® WT Terminal Labelling Kit. This procedure generated fragments of biotin-labelled sense-stranded copy DNA (6–10 μg) between 40 and 70 nucleotides in length that were hybridized onto Human Exon 1.0ST GeneChip® Arrays according to Affymetrix protocols. Array washing, staining and visualisation were performed as described for motor neuron derived RNA.
      
      
        Immunohistochemistry
        Cervical spinal cord anterior horn was examined from 11 ALS patients including seven C9ORF72-ALS patients and four patients with sporadic ALS (Table 1, patients 1–11). Immunohistochemistry was performed for p62 and phospho-TDP-43.
        In staining for p62, slides were first deparaffinised through two changes of xylene and hydrated through decreasing concentrations of alcohol (2×100%/1x95%/1x70%). Antigen retrieval was achieved by boiling the samples in trisodium citrate at pH 6.5, and endogenous peroxidase was blocked in 3% H2O2 in methanol for 20 min. The slides were then stained using the VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories, California, US) following these incubation protocol: serum 30 min RT, anti-p62 Ick ligand antibody (Cat. 610832, BD Transduction Laboratories, California, US) 1 h RT, 2° biotinylated antibody 30 min RT, ABC reagent 30 min RT, Vector DAB reagent 10 min, HCM (Harry’s haematoxylin 2 min, Scott’s tap water until blue colour, dehydration and clear through 70%/95%/2x100% ethanol/2× xylene, mount in DPX).
        In staining for phospho-TDP-43, deparaffinisation, hydration and antigen retrieval were done in a pressure cooker (Antigen Access Unit, A. Menarini, Berkshire, UK) at pH 6 using the Access Citrate solution. Then, the slides were stained using the A. Menarini Intellipath Kit through the following incubation steps: Endogenous peroxidase block 5 min room temperature (RT), casein background blocker 10 min RT, anti-phospho-TDP-43 antibody (Cat. TIP-PTD-M01, Cosmo Bio Co, Tokyo, Japan) 1 h RT, universal probe 15 min RT, HRP-polymer 15 min RT, DAB chromogen 5 min RT, HCM.
      
      
        Genome wide association study
        ALS susceptibility genes were identified by a large genome wide association study (GWAS) which used the NeuroX chip [32] to genotype 3539 ALS cases and 5191 normal controls; the NeuroX chip includes genotyping of standard Illumina exome content of approximately 240,000 variants, and additionally, more than 24,000 custom content variants to improve coverage in genes associated with neurological diseases. Genes significantly associated with ALS were unchanged when the analysis was performed with the custom NeuroX chip content removed to avoid potential bias. GWA on the NeuroX collaboration was analysed using PLINK [37]. 267607 SNPs were analysed in 10081 founders (0 non-founders identified). No SNPs failed frequency and genotyping pruning. Association with ALS was determined by Chi2-test; threshold for significance was set at an unadjusted p-value of 5E-08 [4].
        Alzheimer’s GWA genes were identified using GWAS Central (http://www.gwascentral.org), which is a compilation of summary level findings from genetic association studies. 57 studies were identified containing the keyword ‘Alzheimer’s’. Variants associated with Alzeimer’s disease at a p-value <5E-08 and their associated genes were identified.
      
      
        Gene expression data analysis
        Microarray data were normalised using the Puma package which quantifies technical variability to improve the estimation of gene expression [27]. The significance of association of transcript expression levels with continuous variables such as pathology counts and disease duration was determined by Spearman rank correlation. Differential expression between two groups was determined by Mann–Whitney U-test. In the identification of significant enrichment of gene list ‘x’ in gene list ‘y’ we utilised Fisher’s exact test to calculate the probability that the observed overlap occurred by chance.
        Conversion between various gene/transcript identifiers was performed using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array annotation data and BioMart [13].
        Network detection was performed using weighted gene coexpression analysis (WGCNA) [25]. Global interaction partners of network genes were identified using co-expression and proteomics data from the GeneMANIA prediction server [52].
        For the purpose of all analyses in lymphoblastoid cells and in CSF, patients with disease duration <2 years were defined as rapidly progressive and patients with disease duration >4 years were defined as slowly progressive.
      
      
        Measurement of soluble TREM2 in CSF
        CSF concentrations of sTREM2 were measured using a standard sandwich ELISA consisting of a biotinylated polyclonal goat anti-human TREM2 capture antibody (R & D Systems BAF1828); a monoclonal mouse anti-human TREM2 detection antibody (R & D Systems MAB1828); and a SULFO-TAG–labeled anti-mouse secondary antibody (Meso Scale Discovery R32AC-1). Recombinant human TREM2 protein (huTrem2-hIgG1aglyFc) was produced at Biogen in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and purified by size-exclusion chromatography to remove aggregates since aggregated proteins can lead to higher binding. Streptavidin-coated 96-well plates (Meso Scale Discovery L15SB) were blocked overnight at 4 °C in blocking buffer [0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.05% Tween 20 in PBS (pH 7.4)]. The plates were then incubated with the capture antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were washed three times with washing buffer (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) and incubated with the CSF samples diluted 1:4 or with a titration of recombinant human TREM2 protein (2000 ng/ml to 0.1 ng/ml) for 2 h at room temperature. Plates were washed three times with washing buffer before incubation with the detection antibody for 1 h at room temperature. After three additional washes, plates were incubated with the secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. All incubation steps were performed with gentle shaking. Plates were washed three times with wash buffer, then the electrochemical signal was developed by adding 2× Meso Scale Discovery Read buffer and the light emission measured using the Mesoscale Discovery SECTOR S 600.
        All lumbar punctures were clinically indicated. We aimed to compare levels of soluble TREM2 in CSF from sporadic ALS patients to levels in normal controls. Previously it has been noted that levels of soluble TREM2 can be elevated in a number of inflammatory CNS diseases [35]; therefore our criteria for selection of control cases were: normal CSF constituents and no evidence of neuroinflammation. Diagnoses in control cases included headache with normal CSF, medically unexplained symptoms and cerebrovascular disease. Controls and patients (Table 3) were matched for age and sex; mean age of controls was 51 years (range 34–74 years), mean age of ALS patients was 58 years (range 32–83 years). Controls included 11 males and 9 females; ALS patients included 28 males and 18 females. All samples were collected with written informed consent from the donor, and the work was approved by the South Yorkshire Ethics Committee. Based on the time of sampling relative to disease onset and time of death it was possible to identify at what point in the patients disease course CSF sampling occurred. Early disease was defined as the first 25th-centile of all patients assayed and late disease was defined as the last 25-centile of all patients assayed. In order to minimise the effect of outliers statistical tests were performed using ranks instead of actual values. Correlation with clinical variables was determined by Spearman rank correlation, and differences between groups were determined by Mann–Whitney U-test.Table 3Clinical information relating to CSF samples obtained from sporadic ALS patients and controlsALS/ControlGenderAge at onset (years)Disease duration (years)Age at sample (years)Percentage of disease course at CSF samplingSoluble TREM2 (ng/ml)ALSM35.84.836.922.8%309.6ALSM50.717.053.416.2%2.6ALSM79.71.379.86.3%10.3ALSM67.411.972.139.2%10.8ALSM71.50.872.390.0%5.7ALSF47.814.549.310.9%3.6ALSF65.31.266.385.7%7.9ALSM64.41.065.3100.0%6.9ALSM64.30.864.866.7%2.3ALSF34.40.634.742.9%4.7ALSM54.46.956.124.1%9.0ALSM52.65.454.026.2%27.4ALSM56.412.057.811.8%4.2ALSF76.21.076.975.0%4.9ALSF64.30.464.560.0%8.1ALSM69.40.769.737.5%37.7ALSM42.910.543.99.5%5.3ALSM47.11.347.743.8%18.4ALSF54.25.854.78.7%14.5ALSM57.71.158.030.8%14.8ALSF51.25.652.319.4%22.8ALSF45.28.646.09.7%8.6ALSF59.51.459.817.6%9.9ALSM36.84.438.743.4%8.5ALSM32.08.837.967.0%18.2ALSF50.73.851.726.7%2.9ALSM29.84.531.538.9%2.8ALSF68.52.569.956.7%4.0ALSM81.01.682.594.7%4.3ALSM64.34.567.672.2%25.1ALSM50.62.251.438.5%16.5ALSM65.13.667.772.1%9.7ALSF58.71.359.673.3%16.0ALSM59.25.262.156.5%9.4ALSF60.51.761.665.0%24.8ALSM55.71.856.971.4%16.2ALSM60.14.862.857.9%9.0ALSM65.52.466.541.4%5.1ALSF49.93.852.567.4%17.1ALSFUnavailableUnavailable63.8Unavailable8.3ALSF52.93.454.341.5%5.1ALSM50.82.651.425.8%7.3ALSF62.17.768.380.4%34.9ALSM32.92.633.938.7%4.7ALSF47.31.747.830.0%4.4ALSM66.63.969.676.6%7.9ControlMNANA828NA4.0ControlMNANA407NA6.5ControlFNANA717NA10.6ControlFNANA671NA7.0ControlFNANA628NA2.9ControlMNANA573NA3.4ControlFNANA542NA2.6ControlFNANA563NA4.8ControlMNANA455NA5.9ControlMNANA586NA4.8ControlMNANA473NA14.2ControlFNANA587NA3.1ControlFNANA594NA12.9ControlMNANA886NA9.4ControlMNANA782NA14.7ControlMNANA553NA12.3ControlMNANA502NA5.1ControlFNANA701NA8.9ControlMNANA673NA6.7ControlFNANA475NA3.4
M Male, F Female

      
    
    
      Results
      We aimed to identify a set of genes that can predict ALS disease progression when measured in tissues that are core to disease, but also in tissues that are accessible clinically. Our systems approach has two phases of investigation: a discovery phase (Fig. 1a–c) and a subsequent biomarker assessment phase (Fig. 1d).
      
        Identifying correlates of neuropathology
        To identify genes expressed in correlation with the number of proteinaceous inclusions within motor neurons (pathology correlates), we performed targeted immunohistochemistry and gene expression profiling in ALS motor neurons (Fig. 1a). Cervical spinal cord anterior horn was examined from 11 ALS patients including seven C9ORF72-ALS patients and four patients with sporadic ALS (Table 1, patients 1–11). Total RNA was extracted from isolated motor neurons and expression of 54,675 annotated transcripts was measured by microarray analysis. In adjacent tissue from the same patients we counted the number of motor neurons per unit area containing a p62-positive cytoplasmic inclusion (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Spearman rank correlation was calculated between the expression of each transcript and the pathology counts. Eighty-three transcripts, corresponding to 59 genes, correlated with the quantity of pathology (p < 0.01) (Additional file 2: Table S1).
        Motor neuron inclusions in ALS are expected to stain for TDP-43 and p62 [33]. We confirmed coincidence of p62- and TDP-43-positive staining in cervical cord from the same cases. Presence of p62 and TDP-43 was significantly correlated, despite measurement in non-overlapping tissue sections (Spearman rank correlation, p < 0.05, Additional file 1: Figure S2).
      
      
        Derivation of gene modules associated with neuropathology
        To explore their functional context, each of the 83 pathology-correlated transcripts were used as a seed to identify transcripts with similar expression (top 1% of transcripts by Pearson’s correlation, Fig. 1b). Transcripts were combined into a single network, which was divided into modules of highly correlated genes by weighted gene co-expression analysis (WGCNA) [25, 55]. WGCNA is an established method for module detection within gene co-expression networks and has been previously applied in biomarker development [48]. WGCNA analysis revealed 82 network modules of between 35 and 515 transcripts (Additional file 1: Figure S3, Additional file 2: Table S1). Forty-five network modules contained one or more of the 83 pathology-correlate transcripts. The remaining modules were discarded.
      
      
        Systematic prioritisation of gene modules based on enrichment with ALS biology
        To identify which of the 45 gene modules have potential as biomarkers we needed an independent and systematic test of their relevance to ALS biology. For this purpose three assessment gene sets were curated to represent rate of progression and upstream genetic association with ALS (Fig. 1c). A motor neuron gene set was generated from laser captured motor neurons (Table 1, patients 1–14); motor neurons were obtained from a set of patients which overlapped but was distinct from the data used to derive the 83 pathology-correlated transcripts. It contained 1705 transcripts significantly correlated with disease duration (p < 0.05) (Additional file 2: Table S2). A lymphoblastoid cell gene set was generated from peripherally accessible blood-derived lymphoblastoid cells (Table 2 patients 1–26). It contained 4070 transcripts differentially expressed between patients with rapidly and slowly progressive disease (p < 0.05). (Additional file 2: Table S3).
        The third assessment set was a genome wide association gene set which consisted of 62 genes containing variants (unadjusted asymptotic association test, p < 5E-08) associated with ALS in a genome wide association study (GWAS) of 3539 ALS cases and 5191 normal controls (Additional file 2: Table S4). Genetic variants associated with ALS are by definition upstream. Modules enriched with genetic determinants are more likely to be predictive as genetic determinants are by definition upstream of a disease that occurs in adulthood.
        Three of the 45 modules were enriched with all three assessment gene sets (Fig. 2, modules 1, 25 and 27). Module 25 was the most highly enriched with the motor neuron gene set (p = 1.92E-20) and module 27 was the most highly enriched with the lymphoblastoid gene set (p = 7.82E-21). Both module 25 and 27 were significantly enriched with ALS GWA genes (p value < 0.05). Module 25 and 27 were selected for further characterisation.Fig. 2Prioritisation and functional enrichment of genes modules. Gene co-expression modules associated with ALS neuropathology were identified using WGCNA; modules are numbered 1–82. Modules were tested for enrichment with three assessment gene sets curated to represent rate of progression in motor neurons (a) and lymphoblastoid cells (b), and upstream genetic association (c) with ALS. -log (p-value) refers to the p-value for enrichment of the corresponding module number with the relevant assessment set as calculated by Fisher’s exact test. Only modules significantly enriched with each assessment set (p-value <0.05) are plotted with respective p-values

        To determine whether modules 25 and 27 captured aspects of disease pathogenesis or simply show motor neuron-specific gene expression, we constructed a negative control from an artificial module consisting of genes which are expressed specifically in non-diseased motor neurons [12] (Additional file 2: Table S1). The negative control module was not enriched with the assessment gene set derived from motor neurons or with ALS GWA genes; there was limited enrichment with the lymphoblastoid gene set (p = 0.001). Modules 25 and 27 showed significantly better enrichment with ALS biology gene sets than the negative control module.
      
      
        Functional characterisation of modules
        As modules 25 and 27 showed significant enrichment with ALS biology gene sets we sought to determine the function of genes in these modules (Fig. 1c). Module 25 enriched for the Gene Ontology (GO) biological process categories ‘synaptic transmission, cholinergic’ and ‘response to oxygen stimulus’ (g: Profiler, corrected p-value = 0.04) [40]. Module 27 enriched for the GO category ‘immune system process’ (corrected p-value = 7.32E-07). Module 27 will henceforth be referred to as the immune module.
        Enrichment within module 27 of immune-associated genes suggests that glial cells proximal to diseased motor neurons may have been laser captured alongside extracted motor neurons. To explore which glial cells might have been isolated we examined cell-specific expression of module 27 genes using a reference database of transcriptome data from isolated human brain cell lines (http://web.stanford.edu/group/barres_lab/brainseqMariko/brainseq2.html). Genes within the immune module were classified as expressed in one or more of microglia/macrophage cells, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (Additional file 2: Table S5). 61% of the genes in the immune module are known to be expressed in human microglia/macrophage cells as compared to 30% in mature astrocytes and 17% in oligodendrocytes. The majority of immune module genes are expressed in microglia/macrophage cells rather than alternative glial subtypes.
      
      
        Development of immune module (module 27) into a peripheral tissue biomarker
        A clinically translatable biomarker needs to be measurable in accessible tissue. Markers of inflammation associated with neurodegeneration have been observed in blood [44] and CSF [31]. Module 27 (the immune module) was highly enriched with the assessment set containing genes associated with disease progression in lymphoblastoid cells (p = 7.82E-21). We chose to focus on the immune module for biomarker development.
        To reduce neuron-specific signal and improve likelihood of detecting genes expressed in the immune module in peripheral tissues, we added tissue-independent globally co-expressed genes and protein-protein interacting partners [11] using a database of broadly co-expressed genes with functional association data (GeneMANIA) [52] (Fig. 1d). The immune module was expanded from 65 to 77 genes (Fig. 3). We tested the expanded module against the assessment gene sets representing rate of ALS disease progression and showed an improvement in biomarker performance. The module showed improved enrichment with gene sets related to rate of disease progression in motor neurons gene (p = 6.14E-03 from 4.56E-02), and in lymphoblastoid cells (p = 1.94E-32 from 7.82E-21).Fig. 3Construction of the immune network independent of cell type by addition of globally co-expressed genes and protein-protein interacting partners. The immune network module (module 27) contained 65 genes which was expanded to 77 genes by addition of globally co-expressed genes and protein-protein interacting partners. Each gene is represented by a node and is labelled with its HUGO identifier. Genes originating from module 27 are arranged on the left-side of the diagram; genes identified as globally co-expressed or protein-protein interacting partners are arranged on the right-side of the diagram. Relationships between genes are represented as edges between nodes, either global co-expression (purple) or protein-protein interaction (pink). Only genes with edges reaching statistical significance are shown. CEBPD, LILRA2 and ITGB2 (blue nodes), represent a proposed blood-based biomarker; TREM2 (red node) protein m﻿easured in CSF correlates with disease duration in selected patients

      
      
        Assessment of immune module as a potential biomarker in blood
        To provide evidence in support of the immune module as a potential biomarker, we first explored its predictive capabilities in lymphoblastoid cells derived from the blood of C9ORF72- and sporadic ALS patients with rapid and slowly progressive disease (Fig. 1d, Table 2). C9ORF72-ALS patient samples were used at a previous stage to prioritise the immune module but the sporadic ALS patients comprise an entirely independent dataset. By testing for biomarker performance of the immune module in both datasets separately we aimed to reduce the likelihood of a false positive result.
        First we evaluated whether gene expression in the immune module could predict ALS severity as indicated by the time between onset of symptoms and death. Age of onset and sex have been independently linked to prognosis in ALS [38]. Clinical interventions such as artificial respiratory support have also been shown to affect survival but this data was not available. We fitted a Cox proportional hazards model including age of symptom onset, sex and disease duration (to nearest half-year, Additional file 1: Figure S4) together with the top 15 principal components of gene expression in the immune module. In both C9ORF72 and sporadic ALS, the model was significantly predictive of disease severity (Chi2; C9ORF72-ALS p = 0.01; sporadic ALS p = 0.004). To further test the significance of this result we performed an identical analysis using the negative control module representing genes specifically expressed in non-diseased motor neurons. The top 15 principal components of gene expression in the control module were not significantly predictive in either dataset (Chi2, p > 0.1).
        Next, to determine if the module could be useful to support personalised treatment based on classification, we asked whether gene expression in the immune module could effectively classify patients with rapid versus slowly progressing disease. Binomial logistic regression on expression of individual genes within the immune module identified those genes which differentiated lymphoblastoid cells from patients with rapid and slowly progressive disease compared to the null model. Fifteen of the immune module genes differentiated rapid and slowly progressive C9ORF72-ALS cases; and in sporadic ALS, 20 genes differentiated rapid and slowly progressive cases (Additional file 2: Table S6). LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD (Fig. 3) were predictive in both C9ORF72-ALS and sporadic ALS. Fitting binomial logistic regression with leave-one-out cross validation confirmed that a model combining expression of LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD was able to correctly classify patients by disease severity more often ﻿than would be expected by chance (85% of C9ORF72 and 60% of sporadic ALS classified correctly, Additional file 1: Figure S4). Interestingly LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD are expressed by microglia/macrophage cells (Additional file 2: Table S5).
      
      
        Assessment of immune module as a potential biomarker in CSF
        CSF is frequently used to observe CNS-inflammation [31]. We wished to determine if members of the immune module may have potential as a biomarker in CSF. CSF is relatively acellular and therefore suited to a protein-level rather than gene expression quantification. It was not technically feasible to assess all members of the immune module. TREM2, a member of the immune module (Fig. 3), had an available assay and known association with neurodegeneration [20, 34, 36, 47]. We chose to evaluate soluble TREM2 in CSF as a potential biomarker for ALS (Fig. 1d). Concentrations of soluble TREM2, which is cleaved from the surface of microglia [34], have been measured by ELISA in CSF [24, 34]. Genes thought to determine levels of soluble TREM2 in CSF identified by genome-wide complex trait analysis [36] (Additional file 2: Table S7), are enriched in the immune module (Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.04).
        Levels of soluble TREM2 were measured in CSF from sporadic ALS patients with varying disease severity (n = 46) and controls with normal CSF constituents (n = 20) (Table 3). The effectiveness of TREM2 as a biomarker was investigated in two ways; first, we examined whether levels of soluble TREM2 are altered in ALS in comparison to healthy controls, and second, we tested whether soluble TREM2 can classify rapid and slowly progressive ALS. Levels of soluble TREM2 were significantly higher in CSF from ALS patients compared to controls (mean of 18 ng/ml compared to mean of 7 ng/ml, Mann–Whitney p = 0.04, Fig. 4a). Levels of measured soluble TREM2 in controls are comparable to other studies [36, 47].Fig. 4Measurement of soluble TREM2 in CSF from ALS patients and controls. Soluble TREM2 levels were measured by ELISA in CSF from ALS patients (n = 46) and controls (n = 20) who were age and sex matched. Levels of soluble TREM2 are significantly higher in ALS patients compared to controls (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05) (a). Stage of ALS at the time of sample was determined by the time from onset to sample compared to time from onset to death (censored). Levels of soluble TREM2 are highest in early ALS (CSF sampled in <25th centile of disease course), intermediately raised in late (>75th centile of disease course) and lowest in controls (b). Error bars show standard error. Levels of soluble TREM2 are positively correlated with disease duration in late stage ALS (c). We suggest a model whereby CSF soluble TREM2 is elevated in early disease in all ALS patients but then gradually reduces. In certain patients levels remain relatively high reflecting a prolonged neuroprotective microglial activation which leads to slower disease progression (d)

        TREM2 has been implicated in stimulation of microglia to clear Alzheimer’s-associated protein aggregates [24]. We tested for enrichment of Alzheimer’s disease GWA genes (Additional file 2: Table S8) within the immune module and found that it is highly enriched (Fisher’s exact test, p = 1.83E-07). From this we postulate that the immune module captures a molecular response to neuropathology not just in ALS, but in neurodegeneration more broadly.
        In Alzheimer’s disease levels of soluble TREM2 are higher in early phase disease [46, 47]. The same is true in ALS: mean soluble TREM2 levels are three-times higher in early disease compared to late stage disease (mean soluble TREM2 in early disease = 36 ng/ml, mean soluble TREM2 in late disease = 13 ng/ml, Fig. 4b). Strikingly, in late stage disease levels of soluble TREM2 show a significant positive correlation with disease duration (Spearman rank correlation, p = 0.01, Fig. 4c). In early disease there is not a significant correlation. Early elevation of TREM2 expression may reflect an initial immune response to deposition of pathological aggregates which declines over time; higher levels of TREM2 in late disease may reflect a sustained neuroprotective microglial response (Fig. 4d).
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Our analysis consisted of a data-driven systematic discovery phase leading to discovery of gene modules which were further evaluated in a biomarker assessment phase. In the discovery phase (Fig. 1a–c), transcriptome-wide gene expression changes in proportion to the development of cytoplasmic proteinaceous inclusions in ALS motor neurons allowed us to discover molecular determinants of disease severity. Gene expression and pathology counts were carried out in the same cell population to avoid confounding by variation between populations. The extent of pathology varies between neuronal populations even within individual patients [3]. Transcripts found to be expressed in proportion to the development of neuropathology were utilised to produce 45 modules of co-expressed genes. In a systematic filtering process these modules were then prioritised by demonstration of enrichment with independent measures of ALS biology. We discovered two gene modules strikingly enriched with gene sets associated with rate of ALS progression in both motor neurons and lymphoblastoid cells, and also with ALS GWA genes.
      In the biomarker assessment phase (Fig. 1d) we selected one of the top scoring modules which showed the highest enrichment with rate of progression genes in lymphoblastoid cells, and was enriched with genes associated with immune function. The majority of genes within this module are expressed in microglia as opposed to other glial subtypes. Microglia are crucial for clearance of protein aggregates [16, 51] which is biologically consistent with our focus on motor neuron pathology. Many genes within the immune module have not been previously implicated in ALS, however others have highlighted the role of neuroinflammation and microglial activation in disease progression [10, 44, 45] making this module a good candidate for further investigation. Given that CNS immune function can be observed peripherally [18, 31], we tested the potential of this module to be a prognostic biomarker in peripherally accessible tissue.
      In tissue derived from patient blood, we demonstrated that expression of the immune module as a whole was significantly associated with ALS disease duration. Moreover, a three-gene panel comprising LILRA2, ITGB2 and CEBPD was found to correctly classify individuals as suffering from rapid or slowly progressive disease, independent of both genetic background and clinical intervention such as respiratory support. Measurement in a relatively small number of patients relying on microarray technology is a limitation of these data but a larger biomarker validation study is beyond the scope of this study.
      CSF is also peripherally accessible. TREM2 is a member of the immune module which has been previously linked to both ALS pathogenesis [5] and microglial activation [6]. We investigated the potential for soluble TREM2 in CSF to predict disease course in ALS patients with mixed genetic background. Soluble TREM2 cleaved from the surface of microglia has been proposed as a biomarker in other neurological diseases including Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis [20, 34, 36, 47]. We show that soluble TREM2 levels are significantly elevated in ALS compared to controls. Elevation is most marked in early disease, as has been observed in Alzheimer’s disease [46, 47]. Importantly, in patients where CSF was acquired in late stage disease, higher concentrations of soluble TREM2 are strongly associated with slower disease progression. Marked early elevation of TREM2 expression may reflect an initial immune response to deposition of pathological aggregates which declines over time. It is hypothesised that patients with higher levels of TREM2 in late disease have mounted a sustained neuroprotective microglial response (Fig. 4d).
      Loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in TREM2, which have been linked to risk of Alzheimer’s disease [7, 23], and ALS [5], reduce phagocytosis of aggregated protein by microglia [24]. Reduced phagocytosis may be toxic to stressed neurons and indeed TREM2 activity has been positively associated with a neuroprotective microglial phenotype [39]. Modulating microglial activity through TREM2 has been proposed as a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease [53]. Our data suggests that this therapeutic strategy may also be applicable in ALS. In addition to TREM2, it is probable that our immune module contains other determinants of neuropathology relevant to neurodegeneration more broadly: consistent with this the immune module is enriched with GWA genes for both ALS and Alzheimer’s disease.
    
    
      Conclusions
      The role of microglia in neurodegeneration is controversial. There is evidence for microglia mediated neurotoxicity and neuroprotection. For example, [11C](R)-PK11195 positron emission tomography assay of microglial activation in motor cortex is positively correlated with burden of upper motor neuron degeneration [49] but compromised microglial function through LOF mutations in TREM2 increases the risk of ALS [5]. To explain this controversy microglia are thought to be capable of multiple phenotypes which are variably neuroprotective and neurotoxic [1]. Our immune module is derived by association with motor neuron pathology and predicts ALS prognosis. The prevalence of microglial-expressed genes within this module supports the possibility that there is a direct link between microglial function and motor neuron death. The positive correlation we have identified between soluble TREM2 concentration in CSF and a more benign ALS phenotype supports the possibility of neuroprotection mediated by microglial phagocytosis.
      We have performed a scalable systematic, objective discovery of potential predictive biomarkers and a potential therapeutic target. Pathology-correlated gene expression in motor neurons has, for the first time in a data-driven manner, identified microglial function as an important determinant of ALS pathogenesis across a broad spectrum of genetically heterogeneous patients who all display TDP-43/p62 proteinopathy. Microglia are implicated in neurodegenerative disease [10, 45] and are thought to be responsible for clearance of protein aggregates, clearly linking them to development of neuropathology [16, 51]. We propose that phagocytosis of protein aggregates by microglia is likely to be therapeutic and enhanced by TREM2 signalling, making phagocytosis of protein aggregates by microglia an important focus for future translational research in ALS and other neurodegenerative diseases.
    
  
        
          Background
          To understand the changes of gene regulation in carcinogenesis, we explored signals of DNA methylation – a stable epigenetic mark of gene regulatory elements — and designed a computational model to profile loss and gain of regulatory elements (REs) during carcinogenesis. We also utilized sequencing data to analyze the allele frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and detected the cancer-associated SNPs, i.e., the SNPs displaying the significant allele frequency difference between cancer and normal samples.
        
        
          Results
          After applying this model to chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) data, we identified REs differentially activated (dREs) between normal and CLL cells, consisting of 6,802 dREs gained and 4,606 dREs lost in CLL. The identified regulatory perturbations coincide with changes in the expression of target genes. In particular, the genes encoding DNA methyltransferases harbor multiple lost-in-cancer dREs and zero gained-in-cancer dREs, indicating that the damaged regulation of these genes might be one of the key causes of tumor formation. dREs display a significantly elevated density of the genome-wide association study (GWAS) SNPs associated with CLL and CLL-related traits. We observed that most of dRE GWAS SNPs associated with CLL and CLL-related traits (83%) display a significant haplotype association among the identified cancer-associated alleles and the risk alleles that have been reported in GWAS. Also dREs are enriched for the binding sites of the well-established B-cell and CLL transcription factors (TFs) NF-kB, AP2, P53, E2F1, PAX5, and SP1. We also identified CLL-associated SNPs and demonstrated that the mutations at these SNPs change the binding sites of key TFs much more frequently than expected.
        
        
          Conclusions
          Through exploring sequencing data measuring DNA methylation, we identified the epigenetic alterations (more specifically, DNA methylation) and genetic mutations along non-coding genomic regions CLL, and demonstrated that these changes play a critical role in carcinogenesis through damaging the regulation of key genes and alternating the binding of key TFs in B and CLL cells.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12864-017-3617-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      Cancer, a leading cause of death worldwide [1], is a major focus of biological and clinical research. Dramatic phenotypic alterations in cancer cells have often been attributed to gene mutation and gene regulatory variation [2]. In the last decade, evidence has been accumulating that the malfunction of gene regulatory elements, such as promoters, enhancers, etc., makes a substantial contribution to cancer initiation and progression. For example, the promoter inactivation of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), leading to the silencing of this gene, has been reported as a biomarker of renal cancer [3]. Similarly, in many cancers, the transcription of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), an important tumor suppressor gene, has been found to be terminated after the chromatin blocking of its promoter region [4]. Also, the disruption of super-enhancers plays a key role in inhibiting the oncogene MYC in multiple myeloma [5]. More recently, aberrant DNA methylation along super-enhancers has been reported in a broad spectrum of cancers, such as breast, colon, lung cancer [6].
      To delineate the activity alteration of regulatory elements (REs) during carcinogenesis, the signals of epigenetic marks are commonly measured and compared between cancer and normal cells [7]. DNA methylation, predominantly occurring at the 5’ position of the cytosine in CpG dinucleotides, is a stable epigenetic mark that can be combined with other epigenetic modifiers, such as Histone 3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), for defining the function of the DNA. DNA methylation preliminarily affects the activity of regulatory elements, prompting research into how DNA methylation alters gene regulation. Since the original report in 1983 that DNA methylation is substantially decreased in tumor tissues, aberrant DNA methylation has been well-established as a signature in cancer [8–10]. Global hypomethylation of repetitive DNAs elements has been found to be responsible for promoting multiple cancers, such as inducing the overexpression of oncogenes in leukemia cells [11], silencing the tumor suppressor genes in colorectal cancer [12], and enhancing the chromatin instability in lymphoma [13].
      With the knowledge that de-methylation is strongly correlated with activation of regulatory elements [14], we developed a computational model, in which a genome-wide methylation profile was analyzed to map REs in cancer and normal cells. The comparison between these RE maps in turn established differentially-activated REs (dREs), including dREs gained and lost during cancer development. We tested this model on chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), due to its relatively abundant data resources, and observed that the gained and lost dREs were enriched in the neighborhood of up- and down-regulated genes during CLL carcinogenesis. The genes encoding transcription repressors and DNA methyltransferases have multiple lost dREs in their loci, suggesting an important role for these genes in maintaining normal B-cells and initiating CLL development. Also, dREs are enriched for the GWAS SNPs associated with CLL or, more broadly, cancer traits. CLL genetic mutations, i.e., the substitution of wild - type alleles with CLL-susceptible alleles, are associated with a change in binding of major B-cell TFs. In this study, we identified epigenetic and genetic changes during carcinogenesis and evaluated the impact of these changes on gene regulation.
    
    
      Methods
      
        Data processing of reduced representative bisulfite sequencing (RRBS)-seq profiling
        We analyzed the genome-wide methylation profiles from 32 B cells of 32 chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients and 10 normal CD19+ B cells [15] (which have been deposited to Gene Expression Omnibus GSE66121 by the authors of the referenced study). Methylation levels of CpG sites were measured using reduced representative bisulfite sequencing (RRBS)-seq.
        We downloaded the raw RRBS-seq reads to establish the methylation profiles and detect the genetic mutations in CLL. We established a workflow to analyze these raw sequence data (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Bismark [16] coupled with Bowtie2 [17] was used to align the raw reads to the human genome with the settings “-q --phred64-quals -n 1 -l 40”. The alignment results, i.e., one sam file per sample, were transformed into bam files using the samtools (“samtools view -bT”) [18]. The bam files were used as input to BisSNP [19] to calculate the methylation levels of CpG sites and to call genotypes. The parameters for BisSNP were set as default, i.e., -maxQ 40, -stand_call_conf 8, -stand_emit_conf 0, -mmq 30, -mbq 0. Only SNPs with the minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.01 in 1000 Genomes Project [20] were used to run BisSNP.
      
      
        Mapping consensus dREs in a sample class
        We combined methylation profiles of all samples from a class (i.e., either CLL or control) to obtain consensus dREs. In a methylation profile of a sample, we excluded CpG sites with less than five aligned reads. To account for the variable numbers of reads across samples, we penalized each sample according to its total number of aligned reads. That is, the combined number of reads at a CpG site (e.g., k) was calculated as1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ R( k)=\frac{{\displaystyle {\sum}_{i\in samples\  under\  consideration}}{w}_i{r}_{i k}}{{\displaystyle {\sum}_{i\in samples\  under\  consideration}}{w}_i}, $$\end{document}R(k)=∑i∈samplesunderconsiderationwirik∑i∈samplesunderconsiderationwi,

        where r
ik is the number of the reads at the site k from the sample i. w
i, the weight of the sample i, is determined as the reciprocal of the total number of the aligned reads in the sample i. After replacing r
ik with mr
ik, the number of the methylated reads, in eq. (1), we obtained the combined number of methylated reads at k. After collecting these numbers, we had a combined methylation profile for each tested sample class. We then applied MethylSeekR [21] to each combined methylation profile with the setting of chr.sel = chr2, meth.cutoff = 0.5 and nCpG.cutoff = 3. At the end, we established a map of consensus dREs, together with sREs and hiMRs, in each sample class.
        To categorize dREs based on their genomic location, we employed the annotatePeaks.pl script from HOMER with default settings. The obtained gained dREs, lost dREs and sREs, with average lengths of 660, 814, and 1094 bp, have the average CpG density of 2.4, 3.9 and 5.6 CpGs per 100 bp, respectively.
      
      
        Hierarchal clustering and PCA
        After filtering out CpGs with less than five aligned reads, we used the classic hierarchal clustering algorithm to analyze the similarity of methylation profiles from different samples (32 CLL cells and 10 control B-cells). For this purpose, we employed the MATLAB function “linkage” to build a hierarchal clustering tree using the distance of “Euclidean” and the method of “ward.” The constructed tree was then visualized using the MATLAB function “dendrogram” with the default settings.
        We also used principal component analysis (PCA) to visualize the distribution of samples. PCA was conducted by using the MATLAB function “princomp” with the default settings.
      
      
        Alignment of human and mouse genomes
        To map genomic regions (i.e., dREs, sREs and hiMRs) from the human to the mouse genome, we used the software “bnMapper” (available at https://bitbucket.org/james_taylor/bx-python/wiki/bnMapper). The pair-wise genome alignment (chain file) between the mouse and human required by bnMapper was downloaded from the UCSC Genome browser. bnMapper was run with the setting “--gap 20 --threshold 0.1”. A human genomic region was considered as conserved between human and mouse when the aligned sequence was longer than 20 bps.
      
      
        Repeat composition along dREs
        We used the repeat tables downloaded from the UCSC Genome browser to investigate the repeat content of dREs. Given a group of dREs, the fraction of these regions covered by repetitive elements was calculated. Similarly, the repeat composition of sREs and hiMRs was estimated and was used as a baseline to evaluate the enrichment of repeats in dREs.
      
      
        Enrichment of dREs in loci of genes differentially expressed in CLL
        The RNA-seq profiles of the 32 CLL samples, together with five normal B-cell samples (of which two samples were also included in the methylation data), were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (accession number GSE66117). To avoid unreliable RNA-seq measurements, we filtered out genes with very low expression, i.e., those for which the average expression was less than 0.1 in either CLL or normal B-cells. For each of the remaining genes, the fold change of its expression in CLL was then calculated as the ratio of the average expression in CLL to that in normal B-cells. Ranking the genes based on their expression fold-change, we identified genes up- and down-regulated in CLL by selecting a percentile of top differentially regulated genes.
        Following a general rule, we assigned a genomic region (either RE or hiMR) to the gene with the closest transcription start site (TSS). Given gained (or lost) dREs and a group of genes (say R and G, respectively), we identified dREs linked to any given gene, and calculated the fraction of these dREs from all dREs associated with the genes having reliable RNA-seq measurements (denoted as fract(R, G)). Using the sREs (represented by S) as background, we evaluated the enrichment of G in the surrounding of R as the ratio of fract(R, G) to fract(S, G). The significance of this enrichment was measured under a binomial test.
      
      
        Functional analysis of dREs and genes
        We used the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool (GREAT, available at http://bejerano.stanford.edu/great/public/html/) [22] to examine the function of dREs with the whole human genome as the background. Also, the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, available at https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) [23] was used to estimate the function of a set of genes with the whole list of human genes as the background.
      
      
        Distribution analysis of dREs
        Given a class of dREs, we calculated the distance from each dRE to its nearest within-class neighbor and then computed the distribution of these distances. Through randomly shuffling class labels among dREs, sREs and hiMRs, we generated a background class and assessed the distribution of within-class distances in the background class. We generated 1,000 background classes independently and used the average of their within-class distributions as background for statistical analysis. Similarly, we built the distribution of cross-class distances of gained dREs to their nearest lost dREs and compared this distribution with the background estimated the same way as in the case for within-class computations.
        The bimodal distribution of within-class distances among lost dREs (Additional file 1: Figure S2) implies that parts of lost dREs are clustered close to each other (the distance of <10 kb). To investigate the function of these lost dREs, we identified the lost dREs with the distances to their nearest within-class neighbor less than 10 kb. We used GREAT to evaluate the function of these lost dREs (see Functional analysis of dREs).
      
      
        GWAS analysis of dREs
        We downloaded the NHGRI GWAS Catalog in April 2015 [24]. For each GWAS SNP, we identified all SNPs in a tight LD with the GWAS SNP (r
2 > 0.8 and distance < 500 kb) based on at least one population from the 1000 Genomes Project (CEU, YRI and CHB/JPN) by using SNAP [25]. After that, we linked these tight-LD SNPs to the corresponding traits. At the end, we had 1,759 GWAS traits associated with 324,454 SNPs.
        Considering that 54% of the traits are linked to a small number of SNPs, i.e., less than five tagged SNPs, we agglomerated similar traits together to obtain reliable statistical results. For example, we identified the GWAS SNPs associated with the lymphoma traits (but not CLL), and marked them as “lymphoma”. Similarly, we built SNP categories for “CLL” and “cancer” due to their immediate and close relevance with CLL. Finally, the GWAS SNPs not included in these categories were marked as “irrelevant” and were used as the baseline of our statistical analysis.
        To evaluate the association between a class of dREs (e.g., gained dREs) and a GWAS trait, we identified all SNPs from the 1000 Genomes Project in gained dREs. After that, we counted among these SNPs the ones that have been associated with a given trait. This count measures the overlap between the given GWAS trait and gained dREs. To examine the significance of this count, we adopted a permutation strategy. We randomly shuffled class labels among dREs, sREs and hiMRs, and counted the SNPs linked to the tested trait in the randomly-labeled gained dREs. After repeating this process 1,000 times, we examined the probability of randomly-labeled gained dREs displaying a higher number of given-trait-associated SNPs than the gained dREs. This probability measures the significance of the association between the gained dREs and the tested given trait.
      
      
        Identification of SNPs and their alleles associated with CLL
        We investigated RRBS reads at SNP positions. For those SNPs that were not polymorphic in the set of RRBS reads, we dubbed them non-assayed if they overlapped with less than 10 reads or non-mutated otherwise.
        Given a SNP, we compared its allele frequencies in the population of CLL samples with those of the control population using a binomial test. Given a SNP and its allele k, we have2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ Pr\left( X>{n}_{k, c}\right)=1-{\displaystyle \sum_{i=0}^{n_{k, c}}}\left(\begin{array}{c}\hfill {n}_c\hfill \\ {}\hfill i\hfill \end{array}\right){p_{k, n}}^i{\left(1-{p}_{k, n}\right)}^{\left({n}_c- i\right)}, $$\end{document}PrX>nk,c=1−∑i=0nk,cncipk,ni1−pk,nnc−i,

        where n
k,c is the occurrence count of k in the CLL samples, and n
c is the summation of the occurrence count of all alleles in the CLL samples. p
k,n is the frequency of k in the control samples. We used the MATLAB function “binocdf” for this calculation. We also examined the significance of each diploid genotype state in CLL samples with reference to controls. The minimum of the p values (i.e., Pr s) of the alleles and genotype states measures the significance of genotypic difference between CLL and control. The nucleotide positions having minimum of Prs < 0.05 were marked CLL-associated SNPs. In this study, we detected 305 and 186 CLL-associated SNPs located in lost and gained dREs, respectively. Furthermore, for a CLL-associated SNP, the allele enriched in CLL was considered as the CLL-associated allele.
      
      
        Haplotype association between alleles
        Given a CLL-associated SNP (i.e., m) and a GWAS tag SNP (i.e., m_tag) of which the risk allele has been reported in GWAS studies, we explored the 1000 Genomes Project genotype data to examine haplotype association between the CLL-associated allele (represented as 1|m) and the risk allele at the tag SNP (say 1|m_tag). In detail, we downloaded the genotype data of m and m_tag from the 1000 Genome Project for all populations and built a 2 × 2 contingency table composed by D
11, D
12, D
21, and D
22 (Additional file 1: Figure S3). D
11 is the number of the chromosomes genotyped as (1|m, 1|m_tag). This rule was applied to define D
12, D
21, and D
22 with 2|m representing the non CLL-susceptible allele(s) at m and 2|m_tag representing the non-risk allele(s) at m_tag. With the built contingency table, the haplotype association of (1|m, 1|m
tag) was tested using Fisher’s exact test and the odd ratio (OR) was estimated as3\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ OR=\frac{D_{11}{D}_{22}}{D_{12}{D}_{21}}. $$\end{document}OR=D11D22D12D21.

      
      
        TFBS representation and enrichment along dREs
        We used the TRANScription FACtor (TRANSFAC) version 2010.3 [26] and JASPAR [27] databases of TFBS. We scanned dREs sequences using position weight matrices (PWMs) from these two databases using Find Individual Motif Occurrences (FIMO) [28] with the default settings.
        Given a dREs, we randomly sampled the human genome to obtain 10 control sequences with matching GC content, repeat density, and sequence length. TFBS enrichment in the dREs was calculated as the ratio of a TFBS density in dREs to counterpart in control sequences.
      
      
        Binding affinity changes at CLL-associated allele substitution positions
        Given a CLL-associated SNP, we regarded the CLL-associated allele as the mutant allele (MU), and the other allele as the wild - type allele (WT). To estimate the impact of the CLL-associated alleles in lost dREs, we evaluated the fraction of the TFBSs disrupted after replacing WT with MU alleles (Additional file 1: Figure S4). For a TFBS t, we have4\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ Fract\left( lost\Big| t\right)=\frac{the\  number\  of\  TFBSs\  in\  WT\  but\  not\  in\  MU\ }{the\  number\  of\  TFBSs\  in\  WT}=\frac{N\left( t\Big| WT,\  not\  MU\right)}{N\left( t\Big| WT\right)}. $$\end{document}Fractlost|t=thenumberofTFBSsinWTbutnotinMUthenumberofTFBSsinWT=Nt|WT,notMUNt|WT.

        To evaluate the significance of Fract(lost|t), we first generated control sequences for lost dREs. Given a CLL-associated SNP s, we scanned the lost dRE sequence carrying s and randomly chose N nucleotide positions having the matched WT allele (i.e., the reference alleles for non-mutated positions) with s. For a background position, its MU sequence was constructed by replacing the WT allele with the MU allele of s. In this study, we set N = 30, i.e., we had 30 background positions for each CLL-associated SNP. The significance of Fract(lost|t) was then estimated using a binomial distribution,5\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ Pr\left( X> N\left( t\Big| WT,\  not\  MU\right)\right)=1-{\displaystyle \sum_{i=0}^{N\left( t\Big| WT,\  not\  MU\right)}}\left(\begin{array}{c}\hfill N\left( t\Big| WT\right)\hfill \\ {}\hfill i\hfill \end{array}\right){p_t}^i{\left(1-{p}_t\right)}^{\left({n}_c- i\right)}, $$\end{document}PrX>Nt|WT,notMU=1−∑i=0Nt|WT,notMUNt|WTipti1−ptnc−i,

        where p
t is Fract(lost|t) in controls.
        On the other hand, the impact of the CLL-associated alleles in gained dREs is the significance of the number of TFBSs generated after substituting WT with MU alleles. For a TFBS t, we have6\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ Fract\left( gained\Big| t\right)=\frac{the\  number\  of\  TFBSs\  in\  MU\  but\  not\  in\  WT\ }{the\  number\  of\  TFBSs\  in\  MU}=\frac{N\left( t\Big| MU,\  not\  WT\right)}{N\left( t\Big| MU\right)}. $$\end{document}Fractgained|t=thenumberofTFBSsinMUbutnotinWTthenumberofTFBSsinMU=Nt|MU,notWTNt|MU.

        The significance of Fract(gained|t) was estimated as7\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ Pr\left( X> N\left( t\Big| MU,\  not\  WT\right)\right)=1-{\displaystyle \sum_{i=0}^{N\left( t\Big| MU,\  not\  WT\right)}}\left(\begin{array}{c}\hfill N\left( t\Big| MU\right)\hfill \\ {}\hfill i\hfill \end{array}\right){p_t}^i{\left(1-{p}_t\right)}^{\left({n}_c- i\right)}, $$\end{document}PrX>Nt|MU,notWT=1−∑i=0Nt|MU,notWTNt|MUipti1−ptnc−i,

        where p
t is Fract(gained|t) in the background positions generated using the strategy for lost dRE SNPs.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Methylation of non-promoter CpG sites is informative for distinguishing CLL from control
        CLL is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous disease, in which the genomic and genetic alterations leading its progression and development have yet to be fully understood [29]. We started our analysis with the genome-wide DNA methylation profiles previously established by applying reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) to CD19+ B-cells from 32 CLL patients and 10 normal B-cell samples [15] (see Methods). Thirty-two percent of three million assayed CpG sites reside in CpG islands (Additional file 1: Figure S5). With the aim of understanding proximal and distant gene regulation mechanisms during carcinogenesis, we focused on gene regulatory elements (consisting of promoter, intronic and intergenic elements), excluding other genomic segments (such as exons). Eighty-four percent of assayed CpG sites reside along gene regulatory elements (Fig. 1a and Additional file 1: Figure S6, see Methods). To delineate the contribution of promoters and distal regulatory elements (such as enhancers and silencers), we further divided these regulatory elements into two parts – promoter and non-promoter sequences (i.e., intronic and intergenic genomic loci).Fig. 1Methylation of CpG sites in CLL and control samples. a The pie chart shows the genomic distribution of CpG sites assayed in RRBS-seq. b Fractions of the CpG sites de-methylated in CLL along different genomic regions are compared. To control the noise introduced during data preparation and process, only the CpGs having a considerable methylation change, i.e., the methylation difference between CLL and control is greater than 0.3, were considered here. c The results of a classic hierarchical algorithm show that methylation of the CpGs located in gene regulatory loci can distinguish CLL (in red color) from control (black)

        Next, we directly compared the CpG methylation profiles in CLL with those of normal B-cells. To control the noise introduced during data generation and processing, we focused on the CpGs having a considerable methylation change (i.e., the difference of methylation level between CLL and normal cells is greater than 0.3), denoted as methyl-change CpGs. Thus, every methyl-change CpG is either highly methylated in normal cells but not CLL (we refer to this class as de-methylated in CLL) or, in the opposite case, highly methylated in CLL but not in normal (we refer to those as highly methylated in CLL). After focusing on regulatory elements (i.e., non-promoter, intronic and intergenic elements), we observed that about 70% of non-promoter methyl-change CpGs are de-methylated in CLL (69.1% and 69.7% for intergenic and intronic, respectively), significantly higher than that in promoters (33.7%, binomial test p < 10− 100 intergenic/introns vs. promoters, Fig. 1b), which demonstrates that non-promoter CpGs predominantly lose methylation, while promoter CpGs become predominantly methylated. This is in accordance with the report that de-methylation is widespread in intergenic and intronic regions in cancer cells [30]. Promoters display the smallest fraction of methyl-change CpGs among all genomic regions (Fig. 1b), reflecting that the promoters are more likely to become methylated than other genomic regions in carcinogenesis [31].
        We applied a classic hierarchical clustering algorithm to the CpGs methylation profiles in regulatory elements (see Methods). Using the methylation levels of CpGs located in non-promoter gene regulatory loci, all CLL samples, being clustered into a homogeneous group, were distinguished from normal samples (Fig. 1c). On the other hand, the methylation signals of promoter CpGs could be used to cluster the majority but not all CLL samples together (Fig. 1c). These findings are further supported when using principal component analysis (PCA) to visualize the distribution of CLL and control samples (see Methods, Additional file 1: Figure S6). Collectively, the nucleobase-resolution methylation profiles of CpGs in gene regulatory elements (including promoter and non-promoter elements) contain sufficient information to discriminate CLL from control samples. Especially, non-promoter CpGs are capable of distinguishing two sample classes better than promoter CpGs (Fig 1c and Additional file 1: Figure S6).
      
      
        Mapping consensus REs in CLL and control
        As methylation is highly correlated over short genomic distances and the methylation change at individual CpG sites correlates with chromatin accessibility and transcription factor association of the flanking context [32], our next step was to expand base-resolution methylation levels to local methylation states. By connecting multiple adjacent CpGs (i.e., at least three CpGs in this study) with similar methylation levels [21], we identified the de-methylated regions and marked those located in gene regulatory loci as activated REs (see Methods and Additional file 1: Figure S1). Our assumption was that methylation change corresponds to the change in the activity of a RE—as methylated REs are likely inactive, long spans of CpG de-methylation in CLL likely correspond to REs that have been inactive in normal cells, but have been activated in CLL. Throughout the rest of the manuscript, we use these differential methylation data in reference to REs that are active in either normal or CLL cells.
        To obtain consistent methylation signals in a sample class, we adopted a read-number-based normalization strategy to average methylation signals across samples in a class. We then used the averaged methylation profile to predict consensus REs for a tested sample class (Fig. 2a). By comparing the landscapes of REs in CLL and control, we identified dREs which were further subcategorized into dREs gained and dREs lost during CLL development (Fig. 2a, see Methods). We also identified REs shared by CLL and control (sREs) and the regions highly-methylated in both CLL and control (hiMRs), which were used as a background reference in the following analysis. In total, we identified 6,802 gained dREs, 4,606 lost dREs, 14,091 sREs and 123,233 hiMRs (Fig. 2b). In additional file 1: Figure S7, examples of dREs and sREs are given.Fig. 2Mapping the consensus dREs in CLL and normal samples. a The definitions of consensus dRE and hiMR are depicted. b Stacked bar graph shows the genomic distribution of REs. REs are categorized into gained dREs, lost dREs, and shared REs (sREs) according to their activity states in CLL with respect to normal samples. c Fractions of the conserved and repeat nucleotide positions in the dRE sequences are plotted. A position is regarded as conserved when it shows the identical nucleotide with the aligned mouse genome position

        dREs occupy non-promoter regions (i.e., intronic and intergenic genomic loci) more often than sREs (88% gained and 79% lost dREs vs. 60% sREs, binomial test p < 10− 100, Fig. 2b), which is in line with the preceding finding that non-promoter CpGs display larger methylation changes than promoter CpGs (Fig. 1b), and suggests a pronounced role of enhancer changes during CLL development.
        In addition, gained dREs in 22.6% of promoters and 3.6% of non-promoters overlap CpG islands (CGIs), which is significantly lower than their lost dRE and sRE counterparts (44% and 58.7% of promoters lost dRE and sRE, respectively, and 18% and 28.7% of non-promoters lost dRE and sRE, respectively; p < 10− 100, Additional file 1: Figure S8, see Methods). The significant depletion of CpG islands (CGIs) along the gained dREs coincides with the report that DNA methylation in tumors is higher within CGIs but is lower outside of CGIs [33].
      
      
        dREs of different categories show distinct evolutionary conservation
        We assessed evolutionary conservation of dREs by aligning their human and mouse counterparts (see Methods). First of all, more than half of sREs and dREs have mouse orthologues (65% of sREs, 60.9% of lost dREs and 52.3% of gained dREs), which is significantly higher than that of hiMRs (40.8%, binomial test p < 10− 100, Fig. 2c). This elevated evolutionary conservation is suggestive of molecular maintenance of dRE and sRE functionality. Moreover, dREs show higher sequence divergence than sREs (60.9% and 52.3% v.s. 65%, binomial test p < 10− 100), indicating the propensity of functional change of dREs during CLL development.
        In addition, forty-four percent of hiMR sequence nucleotides are DNA sequence repeats, which is consistent with DNA repeats and repeat-derived regions spanning about half of the human genome [34] (Fig. 2c and Additional file 1: Figure S9). The low repeat density of dREs and sREs (17.65%, 22.14%, and 36.15% in sRE, lost dRE, and gained dRE sequences, respectively) is in agreement with a previous observation of decreased repeat content in regulatory elements [35] and correlates with their elevated evolutionary conservation. As compared with sREs and lost dREs, the gained dREs show the higher content of all classes of retrotransposons (Additional file 1: Figure S9, S10 and Additional file 2: Table S1), which supports the implication of retrotransposons in cancer initiation [36].
      
      
        Gain and loss of dREs positively correlate with the change of target gene expression
        To gain insight into the phenotypic impact of dRE alteration, we explored gene expression data of the tested CLL and control samples (see Methods). Gained dREs are highly enriched in the neighborhood of the genes up-regulated in CLL samples. For instance, in the neighborhood of the top 1% of CLL-up-regulated genes are gained dREs enriched by two times as compared to sREs (binomial test p = 7 × 10− 11, Fig. 3a and Additional file 2: Table S2). Similarly, significant enrichment of gained dREs was also observed in regions around the top 2%, 5% and 10% of genes highly up-regulated in CLL (p < 10− 7). By contrast, the lost dREs are pronouncedly depleted in the neighborhood of the CLL-up-regulated genes (p = 6 × 10− 3, Fig. 3b and Additional file 2: Table S2). In addition, lost and gained dREs shows opposite distribution trends in the neighborhood of CLL-down-regulated genes. That is, lost dREs are overrepresented in the loci of CLL-down-regulated genes (p < 10− 10). All these observations support that the loss and gain of REs in CLL are strongly correlated with the changes in gene expression – the upregulated genes witness the gain of REs while the downregulated genes are associated with the loss of REs, suggesting that the change in gene regulation might be one of the key mechanisms of carcinogenesis.Fig. 3Functional analysis of dREs. Enrichments of the dREs are plotted for the genes (a) up-regulated in CLL and (b) down-regulated in CLL. The * indicates that binomial test p < 0.001. c Biological process association is compared across different gene groups. Human genes are categorized in light of the distribution of dREs and sREs. GS is a set of the genes harboring the gained dREs and sREs in their neighborhood. Similarly, GL represents the genes connected with both the gained and lost dREs, while LS is the genes linked to the lost dREs and sREs. eG represents the genes associated exclusively with the gained dREs, while eS and eL are the genes having only the shared dRE(s) and the lost dRE(s), respectively, in their neighborhood. The values presented in this heatmap are the enrichment fold with respect to all human genes. Zeros indicate insignificant enrichment (i.e, p > 0.001) in the corresponding cases

        Next, we binned human genes according to the presence of dREs and sREs in their neighborhood (see Methods). About 69% of the genes associated with the gained dREs (2,626/3,784) also harbor one or more sREs in their loci, while only 50% of the lost dRE genes (1,464/2,905) host sREs (Additional file 1: Figure S11). The genes linked to either the gained dREs or sREs or both are enriched with the genes participating in apoptosis, cell death and immunological process. All these biological processes are activated in normal B-cells and are impaired in cancer cells [37]. Also, genes exclusively linked to the lost dREs play a role in cell motility (Fig. 3c and Additional file 2: Table S3), and abnormal motility has been found in CLL cells [38]. Furthermore, the observation that the genes associated with both the gained dREs and sREs have a function in T cell differentiation and activation (Fig. 3c) partially explains the finding that T cell numbers are increased in most patients with CLL [39].
      
      
        Lost dREs cluster near the genes encoding DNA methyltransferases and transcription repressors
        The analysis of the distribution of dREs revealed that the distances between two neighboring gained dREs (i.e., within-class distances between gained dREs) are significantly shorter than expected (Wilcoxon rank-sum test p < 10− 16, Additional file 1: Figure S3, see Methods). Similarly, the within-class distances of the lost dREs are much smaller than expected (p < 10− 16). The cross-class distance (i.e., the distance of a gained dRE to its nearest lost dRE) is longer than expected (p < 10− 16, Additional file 1: Figure S3). These findings show that dREs having the same activity likely cluster together, suggesting that the change of DNA activation occurs selectively, rather than randomly, along the human genome during CLL development. That is, certain genomic regions are subject to become activated (e.g., methylation decrease), while others tend to be de-activated (e.g., methylation increase).
        As indicated by the bimodal distribution of within-class distance among lost dREs, there exist genomic regions having a high abundancy of lost dREs (Additional file 1: Figure S3). We hypothesized that the genes located near these regions play essential roles in maintaining normal B-cells, being buffered for regulatory alteration and thus requiring multiple lost dREs for their transcriptional disruption during CLL carcinogenesis. To examine this hypothesis, we detected the genes harboring multiple lost dREs in their loci (see Methods), and noticed that these genes are significantly associated with methyltransferase activity (enrichment fold = 2.06, p = 1.67 × 10− 4, Table 1). For example, the two DNA methyltransferase genes MGMT and DNMT1 harbor three lost dREs but no gained dREs in their loci. Transcriptional disruptions of these genes and inactivating mutations at their coding regions have been reported in leukemogenesis, such as acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and CLL [40]. Besides, the genes regulating the binding of NFKB, such as P53 and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1), host multiple lost dREs in their neighborhood. NFkB is a major TF in normal and CLL B-cells, of which the binding activity is altered during CLL development [41].Table 1Functional analysis of multi-lost dREs with respect to all lost dREsRankMolecular function
P-valueEnrichment foldNumber of elementsmulti-lost dREsall dREs1NF-kappaB binding1.67E-042.0612122DNA-methyltransferase activity1.67E-042.0612123miRNA binding3.46E-042.0611114oxidoreductase activity, acting on NAD(P)H, oxygen as acceptor3.46E-042.0611115superoxide-generating NADPH oxidase activity3.46E-042.0611116peptidyl-histidine dioxygenase activity7.16E-042.0610107oxygen sensor activity7.16E-042.0610108peptidyl-asparagine 3-dioxygenase activity7.16E-042.0610109protein methyltransferase activity7.16E-042.06101010protein-lysine N-methyltransferase activity7.16E-042.061010

      
      
        CLL and CLL-related GWAS SNPs fall in dREs
        To address the phenotypic or pathological impact of dREs, we explored the results of GWAS. The NHGRI GWAS collection [24], in which approximately 200,000 SNPs are associated with 1,106 phenotypic or pathological traits, was used for this purpose. Overall, 3,262 GWAS SNPs or the SNPs located in tight - link disequilibrium blocks with GWAS SNPs (r
2 > 0.8) reside in dREs and sREs, of which 415, 608, and 2,239 SNPs are in the lost dREs, gained dREs, and sREs, respectively (see Methods). As more than half of GWAS SNP categories consist of less than five SNPs, we agglomerated the GWAS SNP categories linked with similar traits to generate broad SNP categories for CLL, lymphoma, and other cancers (such as melanoma, colorectal, ovarian and breast) to obtain reliable statistical estimates. These diseases were chosen due to their direct relevance to CLL. We labeled all GWAS SNPs not falling into any of these three broad categories as irrelevant and used them as baseline (see Methods). No enrichment of irrelevant SNPs in dREs suggests that our analysis strategy is able to address the ascertainment bias of GWAS SNPs (Fig. 4a and Additional file 2: Table S4). Our analysis revealed that each dRE group shows a distinct profile of GWAS traits. Gained and lost dREs are significantly enriched for the SNPs associated with CLL or, more broadly, lymphoma, (p < 5 × 10− 5, Fig. 4a and Additional file 2: Table S4). In addition, the dREs, rather than the sREs, are significantly enriched for cancer SNPs (p < 0.02), suggesting that dREs mutations are primarily susceptibility candidates for cancers, including haematological cancers. All dRE/sRE CLL and lyphoma SNPs are detailed in Additional file 1: Figure S12 and Additional file 1: Figure S13, respectively.Fig. 4Association of dREs with GWAS traits. a The density of GWAS SNPs along the dREs is displayed for the agglomerated traits, including CLL, lymphoma and cancer. The GWAS SNPs not linked to these traits are marked as irrelevant and used as reference. The density of GWAS SNPs along the dREs is measured as the number of SNPs associated with a tested trait per 1,000 SNPs. The ** indicates that binomial test p < 1 × 10− 5. b Heatmap showing the SNP enrichment along dREs for individual GWAS traits. The enrichment is the ratio of the SNP density in the dREs to the expected density. In a cell, the shade of color correlates with the enrichment level, the darker green being higher enrichment. The white cells represent insignificant enrichment, i.e, p > 0.05

        We also examined the association of dREs with individual GWAS traits (see Methods). The results consistently support the aforementioned functions of dREs (Fig. 3c), since the gained and lost dREs are strongly enriched for the SNPs linked to CLL and/or other cancers (p < 5 × 10− 3, Fig. 4b and Additional file 2: Table S5). Also, the sREs are remarkably linked to immunity-related traits, such as asthma and adaptive immunity (p < 1 × 10− 8), which is in line with the observations that sREs are significantly associated with T cell activation and differentiation (Fig. 3c).
      
      
        Examples of GWAS SNPs in dREs
        We next examined all cancer-related GWAS SNPs located in dREs. As an example, a gained-dRE SNP rs1839563 is strongly linked to rs6466479 (r
2 = 0.93, distance = 11804 bp), a GWAS SNP significantly associated with autoimmune disease and hematological cancers, with G being the risk allele [42]. Also, the examination of the genotype state based on RRBS-seq data (see Methods) reveals that the T allele of rs1839563 is enriched in CLL with respect to the control (binomial test p < 10− 16, see Methods, Fig. 5a). In addition, through exploring the data from the 1000 Genomes Project [20], we noticed that the allele T at rs1839563 is in a prominent haplotype with the risk allele G of GWAS SNP rs6466479 (OR = 257.9, Fisher’s exact test p = 4 × 10− 238, see Methods). These observations further elaborate the association of rs1839563 and its allele G with the haematological cancer. Furthermore, the mutation from C to T generates binding motifs for interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), transcription factor 3 (TCF3), and RBPJk (Fig. 5a). All these TFs are over-expressed in CLL. IRF1 activates the transcription of interferons, which in turn up-regulates CD26 and CD38 in malignant B-cells [43]. RBPJk, an important regulator in the Notch signaling pathway, plays a critical role in anti-apoptotic mechanisms during CLL development [44]. TCF3, a major B-cell transcription factor also known as E2A and E47, promotes proliferation of CLL [45]. Taken together, rs1839563 demonstrates the potential association with CLL after being mutated from C to T.Fig. 5Examples of GWAS SNPs located in dREs. The dREs SNPs (a) rs1839563 and (b) rs3806624 are tightly linked to the SNPs associated with the CLL-related traits, such as haematological cancers or colorectal cancer. Bar graphs show the comparison of allele frequencies between CLL and control samples. The flanking sequences of the example SNPs are displayed, along which the example SNPs are implied by a box with dashes. For a SNP, the black allele is the one enriched in CLL (i.e., CLL-associated), while the grey allele is the one associated with normal samples. To show the TFBS change caused by CLL-associated substitutions, the TFBSs mapped to the black alleles, but not to the grey alleles, are presented for the gained-dRE SNPs (a), and the TFBSs mapped to the grey alleles but not black alleles are displayed in the case of the lost-dRE SNPs (b). Two additional examples are shown in Additional file 1: Figure S14 and S15

        Another example lies at rs3806624, a lost-dRE SNP. rs3806624 has been associated with Hodgkin’s lymphoma and has G as a risk allele in a GWAS study [46]. Our analysis shows that the allele G of rs3806624 is significantly enriched in CLL (allele frequency is 0.57 and 0.21 in CLL and control, respectively; binomial test p = 0.0029, Fig. 5b), indicating the possible deleteriousness of this allele in CLL. The allele substitution of G to A potentially disrupts the binding motif of P53 and CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) (Fig. 5b), TFs known to play roles in apoptosis and hematopoietic cell differentiation. The coincidence between the CLL-enriched allele and the reported risk allele, together with the binding disruption caused by the CLL mutation, supports the possible pathogenicity of rs3806624.
        We have a total of six cancer-associated GWAS SNPs exhibiting a significant difference of allele frequency between CLL and control (Additional file 2: Table S6). Among these SNPs are the above example SNPs, rs1976684, rs2151512, rs8077394 and rs133018 (see Additional file 1: Figure S14 and S15). Most of these SNPs (5/6) exhibit a prominent haplotype association between the CLL-enriched alleles and the risk alleles detected in GWASs (Additional file 2: Table S6). These cancer SNPs, coupled with the statistical results presented in the previous section, suggest a significant association of dREs and genetic mutations inside these regions with CLL or CLL-related traits. We also observed that genetic mutations are able to change the binding sites of CLL/normal B-cell TFs, which may be the driver of phenotypic alterations.
      
      
        Changes of TFBS in CLL development
        To investigate gene regulatory changes underlying carcinogenesis, we evaluated and contrasted transcription factor binding site (TFBS) enrichment in gained and lost dREs (see Methods). The results reveal that all gained and lost dREs display a significant enrichment of eight TFBSs (Fig. 6a), including those of NFKB1, estrogen receptor 2 (ESR1), and P53, all well-known for activating and maintaining B and CLL cells. Gained dREs are exclusively enriched for the TFBSs of TCF3 and PPAR (Fig. 6a and Additional file 2: Table S7). These TFs are major TFs in CLL and, more broadly, leukemia, as discussed above. Lost dREs are enriched with the TFBSs of PAX5, AP2, and E2F1. E2F1 has been found to be involved in tumor suppression and cell cycle, and the loss of E2F1 results in the progress of carcinogenesis and the decrease of lymphocyte tolerance [47]. PAX5 is an essential marker in the development and activation of B-cells and leukemogenesis [48]. Overall, the different TFBS signatures suggest that CLL B-cells use the distinct gene regulation pathways found in normal B-cells.Fig. 6TFBS enrichment in different dRE groups. a Each dRE group is shown to have a distinct TFBS enrichment. b CLL-associated mutations in the lost dREs disrupt the binding sites of B-cell TFs. c CLL-associated mutations in the gained dREs generate the binding sites of CLL TFs. The black dots indicate the TFs relevant to CLL, and the grey dots represent the TFs relevant to CLL-related diseases, such as leukemia. The details are given in Additional file 2: Table S8 and S9

        Next, we examined how genetic mutations, i.e., the allele substitutions at SNPs identified in this study, impact the binding affinity of TFs. We did not have genetic variation data directly available for the tested CLL samples. Therefore, we explored RRBS-seq data to identify SNPs strongly associated with CLL, in which the genotype in CLL samples is significantly different from the controls, along with the CLL-associated substitutions at these SNPs (see Methods). In total, 491 such SNPs were identified in dREs, of which 305 were located in the gained dREs and 186 were in lost dREs. We assessed TF binding alterations potentially caused by the CLL-associated substitutions (see Methods). By a comparison to the random positions having matched base-pair composition along the lost dREs, we noticed that the detected CLL-associated substitutions are associated with the loss of binding site of P53, NFKB2, E2F1, and PAX5 more frequently than expected (enrichment of TFBS loss > 1.5 and p < 0.05, Fig. 6b and Additional file 2: Table S8). E2F1 and PAX5 are the major regulators in normal B-cells, of which TFBSs have been found to be enriched uniquely along the lost dREs (Fig. 6a and Additional file 2: Table S7). Also, in the context of the gained dREs, 15 TFBSs are enriched only in the sequences carrying CLL-associated alleles (p < 0.01, see Methods, Fig. 6c and Additional file 2: Table S9). Most of these TFBS correspond to well-known CLL TFs, such as TCF3 and HIF1. HIF1 is required for the survival of leukemia stem cells under hypoxic environments, such as bone marrow niches [10, 49]. In addition, the CLL-association substitutions are more likely than expected to alter the binding affinity of NFKB and PAX5 in both the gained and lost dREs, compatible with the functions of these TFs in CLL as well as normal B-cells.
      
    
    
      Discussion and conclusion
      In this study, we established a workflow to identify differentially-activated REs (dREs) in carcinogenesis and applied it to CLL data. Most of the CLL dREs are located in non-promoter gene regulatory loci, indicating a substantial role enhancer alterations play in CLL carcinogenesis. We found that dRE changes are strongly correlated with the change of gene expression, i.e., gained/lost dREs are enriched in the loci of up-/down-regulated genes in CLL, respectively.
      We found that lost and gained dREs rarely co-occur in the same gene loci, suggesting reprogramming of the regulatory architecture is locus-long and not necessarily targeting individual regulatory elements in carcinogenesis. As expected, gained dREs are significantly associated with CLL-induced biological processes. For example, 68% of the genes having the function of DNA damage response exclusively harbor gained dREs, which is 2.3 times higher than expected. Also 74% of genes regulating B cell activation host gained dREs. DNA methyltransferase genes, for example, DNMT3A and MGMT, which are essential for maintaining cell cycle and methylation levels of normal B-cells, harbor multiple lost dREs but zero gained dREs in their neighborhood. In addition, both gained and lost dREs significantly coincide with CLL, lymphoma, and, more broadly, cancer-associated GWAS SNPs. Furthermore, most of the cancer-associated alleles at these SNPs (83%) are in predominant haplotypes with the risk alleles reported in GWAS. All of these findings indicate the phenotypic consequence of RE changes during CLL development.
      By examining TFBS enrichment in dRE sequences, we observed that normal and CLL B-cells recruit distinct gene regulatory pathways, although both of them employ common TFs, such as NFKB and P53. Apart from these common TFs, the key TFs in normal B-cells include PAX5, E2F1 and AP2, while CLL employs TCF3, PPAR, etc. Moreover, through analyzing the impact of the identified CLL-associated mutations on TF binding, we found that these mutations change the binding activity of key TFs, i.e., disrupting/generating TF binding sites in the lost/gained dREs, more frequently than expected.
      
        Conclusion
        Overall, through exploring sequencing data of chromatin states, we established the maps of REs in normal and cancer cells and identified genetic mutations during CLL development. The comparison between these RE maps enabled us to identify gene regulatory variations during cancer initiation in different layers, such as TF binding and chromatin interaction. To test the generalization of our pipeline, we applied it to a liver tumor dataset consisting of 4 tumor and 4 control samples [50], and noticed that the distribution of dREs is highly correlated with the change of expression of local genes (Additional file 1: Figure S16), which is similar to the finding on the CLL data analysis. This indicates that our observations are likely not limited to CLL and could be generalized to other cancers.
      
    
  
        
          Background
          The distinct types of hematological malignancies have different biological mechanisms and prognoses. For instance, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is generally indolent and low risk; however, it may transform into acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which is much more aggressive.
        
        
          Methods
          We develop a novel network analysis approach that uses expression of eigengenes to delineate the biological differences between these two diseases.
        
        
          Results
          We find that specific genes in the extracellular matrix pathway are underexpressed in AML. We validate this finding in three ways: (a) We train our model on a microarray dataset of 364 cases and test it on an RNA Seq dataset of 74 cases. Our model showed 95% sensitivity and 86% specificity in the training dataset and showed 98% sensitivity and 91% specificity in the test dataset. This confirms that the identified biological signatures are independent from the expression profiling technology and independent from the training dataset.
          (b) Immunocytochemistry confirms that MMP9, an exemplar protein in the extracellular matrix, is underexpressed in AML. (c) MMP9 is hypermethylated in the majority of AML cases (n=194, Welch’s t-test p-value <10−138), which complies with its low expression in AML.
          Our novel network analysis approach is generalizable and useful in studying other complex diseases (e.g., breast cancer prognosis). We implement our methodology in the Pigengene software package, which is publicly available through Bioconductor.
        
        
          Conclusions
          Eigengenes define informative biological signatures that are robust with respect to expression profiling technology. These signatures provide valuable information about the underlying biology of diseases, and they are useful in predicting diagnosis and prognosis.
        
        
          Electronic supplementary material
          The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12920-017-0253-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
        
      
    
      Background
      Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive type of blood cancer and accounts for 1.2% of cancer deaths in the United States [1]. It is the most common acute leukemia, which is characterized by the rapid growth of immature white blood cells. These cells interfere with the production of normal blood cells in the bone marrow. Without treatment, AML can lead to death within months after diagnosis [2]. Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) are a set of less aggressive diseases; however, about 30 to 40% of MDS cases can transform into AML [3]. Therefore, it is critical to delineate the exact mechanisms of this transformation [4].
      Possible molecular mechanisms include genetic mutations [5, 6], chromosomal abnormalities [7], and epigenetic changes [8, 9]. For example, mutation and abnormal expression of mRNA splicing genes such as SRSF2 [10] and SF3B1 [11] are associated with the prognosis of MDS. Overexpression of Bcl-2 increases resistance of MDS cells to apoptosis [12], and it can play a role in the transformation into leukemia [13]. Similarly, the abnormal expression of some miRNAs such as miR-125 and miR-155 can lead to aberrant self-renewal of HSC [14], a characteristic of AML.
      Although investigating the differences between AML and MDS at the molecular level has provided valuable insight, the research in this area has only scratched the surface of the problem. In particular, the current knowledge is far from adequate for the development of strategies for preventing or predicting the transformation of MDS into AML [9]. Researchers have proposed gene expression profiling as a systematic approach to explore the biology and clinical heterogeneity of MDS.
      Most notably, Microarray Innovations in Leukemia (MILE), an international research consortium, assessed the clinical utility of gene expression profiling for the diagnosis and classification of leukemia subtypes [15, 16]. They investigated 3334 leukemia patients, including 202 AML with normal karyotype (AML-NK) and 164 MDS cases in their study, and they developed a classifier to distinguish MDS from AML. While their classifier could correctly predict 93% of AML cases from expression profiles, it failed to identify half of MDS cases [16]. This emphasized the heterogeneity of MDS and underlined the need for more sophisticated approaches for analyzing expression profiles. Specifically, the following challenges limited the performance of the classification: 
The classifier was based only on the 100 most differentially expressed genes. However, the biological processes in a hematopoietic cell often depend on the coordination of many more genes. Because the status of the cell is determined by the level of expression of hundreds of transcripts, restricting the analysis to only 100 genes could decrease the statistical power to a great extent [17]. Also, a random gene might be considered differentially expressed due to biological or technical noise or due to the difference in the analyzed cell types. Such a gene would convolute a classification based on differentially expressed genes [18].The produced data were inconsistent because of multiple platforms and approaches used across different institutions [9]. For instance, if a signature was defined using the level of expression in a microarray dataset, it would be very challenging to interpret and use that signature in an RNA-Seq dataset produced in a different laboratory [19].

      We hypothesized that gene network analysis addresses both of the above challenges because it models the interactions between genes in a comprehensive structure [20, 21] (Additional file 1: Note S1). Recently, Liu reviewed the computational methods that employ a gene network approach to identify biomarkers from high-throughput data [22]. Gene networks provide a systematic way to organize complex data, and to identify biomarkers that are useful in improving diagnosis, prognosis and therapy of diseases.
      To address the above-mentioned challenges in analysis of expression profiles, we developed Pigengene, a novel methodology that is inspired by—and builds upon—coexpression network analysis and Bayesian networks. Briefly, we identify gene modules using coexpression network analysis [23]. We summarize the biological information of each module in one eigengene using principal component analysis (PCA) [24]. Our approach is fundamentally different from applying PCA directly on the entire expression profile, which can lead to significant loss of information [25]. We innovatively use eigengenes as biological signatures (features) to identify the mechanisms underlying the disease. For instance, we use eigengenes to train a Bayesian network that models the probabilistic dependencies between all modules. Alternatively, we infer a decision tree to predict the disease type based on eigengenes. The main idea of our methodology is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1Schematic view of the Pigengene methodology. a The input is a gene expression profile (matrix) provided by RNA-Seq or microarray. b The coexpression network is built according to the correlation between gene pairs. c For each module, an eigengene is computed as a weighted average of the expression of all genes in that module. d Optionally, a Bayesian network is fitted to the eigengenes to delineate the relationships between modules. e A decision tree is fitted to the eigengenes and used for classification. f The results are validated on independent expression datasets and also evaluated using other data types. For instance, DNA methylation profiles can confirm gene-silencing events [43]

      We used our methodology to classify patients in the MILE dataset. The accuracy of our model reached 95% for AML and 86% for MDS thus significantly outperforming the previously reported accuracy of 93 and 50%, respectively [16] (Table 1). To show the generalizability of the proposed approach, we report the results of applying it to several cohorts of breast cancer.
Table 1The confusion matrices show the accuracy of our decision tree on the training (MILE) and test (BCCA) datasetsDatasetMILE (train)BCCA (test)DiseaseAML-NKMDSAML-NKMDSFull tree (155 genes)191 (95%)141 (86%)51 (98%)20 (91%)Reduced tree (14 genes)181 (90%)137 (84%)51 (98%)20 (91%)Mills et al. [16]188 (93%)82 (50%)Reference diagnosis2021645222The percentages of correctly identified cases with respect to the reference diagnosis are shown in parentheses. Compared to Mills et al., our decision tree is 36% more sensitive to MDS. The sensitivity to AML is comparable in both approaches

    
    
      Results
      We identified 33 gene modules as clusters of genes that are coexpressed in the 202 AML cases from the MILE dataset [23] (Additional file 1: Note S2). The sizes of the modules vary in the range of 21 to 888, with a mean and median of 153 and 75, respectively (Additional file 1: Figure S1).
      
        Analysis of gene modules
        Overrepresentation analysis reveals that some of the modules are associated with canonical pathways and biological processes. For instance, module 6 is enriched with genes that are related to the cell cycle. That is, out of 421 genes in the Reactome cell cycle pathway [26], 81 (19%) are grouped in module 6, which consists of 255 genes (p-value of the hypergeometric test <10−37). Similarly, module 12 is associated with extracellular matrix, module 14 with cytotoxic pathway (CD8+ T cells), module 15 with DNA replication, and module 21 with translation (Additional file 1: Figures S2 and S3 and Additional file 2: Table S2).
        Module 33 is the smallest module containing 21 genes. We named it HIST1 because almost all of its genes (20, 95%) encode proteins from the linker histone, or H1, family (Additional file 3: Table S1). Half of the 39 genes in module 28 are from the homeobox family. Considering that this module contains 10 HOXA and 9 HOXB genes, we named it HOXA&B module. It is highly enriched with the homeobox genes that have been reported to be associated with the development and prognosis of AML [27, 28] (Additional file 1: Figure S4, Additional file 3: Table S1 and Additional file 4: Table S3).
      
      
        Eigengenes are associated with the disease
        We summarized the biological information of each module in one eigengene (Additional file 5: Table S4). An eigengene of a module is a weighted average of expression of all genes in that module. The weights were adjusted such that the loss in the biological information is minimized (Methods) [24, 29]. In the MILE dataset, all module eigengenes present significantly different expression in AML vs. MDS. The adjusted Welch’s t-test p-values are in the range of 10−61 to 10−6, with a median of 10−24 (Additional file 1: Figure S5) [30].
        We hypothesized that the eigengenes are important biological signatures that can predict the disease type solely based on gene expression. To validate this hypothesis, we developed an innovative approach to infer the values of these eigengenes using the RNA-Seq data from an independent dataset produced at the British Columbia Cancer Agency (BCCA) (Methods). We used this approach to investigate the patterns common in the MILE and BCCA datasets. Interestingly, eight eigengenes achieve significant p-values (<0.01, Bonferroni adjusted) on both BCCA and MILE datasets, indicating that these biological signatures are independent from the profiling platform (Fig. 2 and Table 2). The eight differentially expressed modules include module 28 (HOXA&B), module 21 (translation), module 12 (extracellular matrix), and module 14 (CD8+ T cells).
Fig. 2The eight eigengenes that are differentially expressed in both datasets. We computed an eigengene for each module as a weighted average of the expression of all genes in that module. The intensity of the colors in each heatmap corresponds to the normalized average expression. a Each column corresponds to an eigengene. Each row shows the expression of a case from the MILE microarray dataset. AML cases were first clustered and then plotted together with MDS cases for comparison. Three (five) eigengenes have clearly higher expression in MDS (AML) cases. Table 2 reports the adjusted p-values, shown in the green strips at the top. b The corresponding expression values are similar in the BCCA RNA-Seq dataset, which indicates that these biological signatures are robust and independent from the profiling platform
Table 2These eigengenes were differentially expressed in AML vs. MDS casesModule14121417212528
P-value (MILE)10−37
10−32
10−61
10−23
10−28
10−43
10−32
10−33

P-value (BCCA)10−3
10−5
10−3
10−2
10−3
10−7
10−3
10−11
They had adjusted p-values (Welch’s t-test) less than 0.01 in both the MILE and BCCA datasets

        We fitted a Bayesian network to the eigengenes to determine the relationships of the modules with each other and with the type of hematological malignancy (Additional file 1: Note S3) [31]. Descendants of the “Disease” node, the variable that models the type of malignancy, are enriched with genes known to be associated with AML (Fig. 3). The relatively high dependency between these eigengenes and the disease type suggests that they have useful biological information that can explain the differences between the two diseases.
Fig. 3The Bayesian network fitted to the eigengenes. Each node represents an eigengene of a module. The arcs model the probabilistic dependencies between the modules [86]. The “Disease” node is set to 1 for AML and 0 for MDS, and its children are highlighted in pink. Some modules are labeled based on their association with a biological process or a pathway (Additional file 2: Table S2). We used Miller et al., survey to identify the 427 genes reported to be associated with AML in at least three studies [81] (Additional file 3: Table S1). For each module, the percentage of AML-related genes is noted. The percentages that exceed 5% are shown in red. As expected, most of the children of Disease are enriched in genes known to be associated with AML. Specifically, the average of percentages over the children of the Disease node is 10%, which is twice the average of all modules (5%). Also, hypergeometric tests showed that modules 3, 7, 12, and 28 are statistically enriched with AML-related genes (Bonferroni adjusted p-values are 10−7, 10−13, 10−3, and 10−8, respectively). All four of these modules are descendants of the Disease node

      
      
        AML and MDS are different in their expression of extracellular matrix, HOXA, and HOXB genes
        We fitted a decision tree to the eight children of the Disease node in our Bayesian network (R package C50 version 0.1.0-24) [32]. We used only MILE data to infer the topology of the tree and the corresponding parameters. The algorithm automatically selected the extracellular matrix and HOXA&B eigengenes (modules 12 and 28, respectively). The inferred decision tree had high predictive accuracy (Fig. 4). Specifically, 191 AML-NK cases (95%) and 141 MDS cases (86%) were correctly identified (Additional file 6: Table S5).
Fig. 4A simple decision tree for distinguishing AML from MDS cases. If the normalized extracellular matrix eigengene of a case is less than -0.001, it is classified as AML. Otherwise, the HOXA&B eigengene determines whether the case is AML (>−0.004) or MDS (≤−0.004). The number of cases classified in each leaf is noted for both the MILE (left) and the BCCA (right) datasets. Only the middle leaf corresponds to MDS. At the fixed thresholds shown above, this tree correctly classified 328 cases (90%) in the MILE dataset (the training set) and 71 cases (96%) in the BCCA dataset (the test set)

        The majority of AML cases (157, 78%) were identified because of their low expression of extracellular matrix genes (i.e., their normalized eigengene value was less than −0.001). For the rest of the cases, which expressed the extracellular matrix eigengene, the tree considered the expression of the HOXA&B eigengene. If it was over −0.004, the case was classified as AML. The tree shows that for a case to be MDS, it must have relatively high expression of the extracellular matrix (Fig. 5 and Additional file 1: Figure S6) and low expression of HOXA&B (Fig. 6 and Additional file 1: Figure S7).
Fig. 5Comparing the expression of extracellular region genes. Each column shows the expression of a gene from the extracellular matrix module that is associated with the “extracellular region” in the cellular component category of Gene Ontology (GO). For clarity, each column is scaled by subtracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation. Each row corresponds to a sample from the MILE dataset. These 36 genes are generally underexpressed in AML compared to MDS. The expression of all 133 genes in the extracellular matrix module have a similar pattern (Additional file 1: Figure S6)
Fig. 6Comparing the expression of genes in the HOXA&B module. Expression of every member of HOXA&B module is shown in one column. Each row corresponds to a sample from the MILE dataset. The majority of HOXA and HOXB genes in this module are not expressed in MDS. Their expression in AML are variable indicating the heterogeneity of the disease. They anticorrelate with GNG2, CD48, and APP, which have the least negative weight (-0.7) in the corresponding eigengene (the green strip at the top). These patterns are similar in the BCCA dataset (Additional file 1: Figure S7)

        
          Misclassification of MDS was associated with risk factor
          The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) score [3] is the standard tool for MDS risk stratification [33]. It ranges from 0 to 3.5, and a higher value indicates a poorer prognosis. There are 30 MDS cases (18%) in the MILE dataset with poor prognosis (IPSS ≥1.5). This set has a significant overlap with the 23 cases “misclassified” by our decision tree (Additional file 6: Table S5). Specifically, 15 MDS cases with poor prognosis show AML signatures and are classified as AML by the tree (hypergeometric test p-value <10−7). This suggests that underexpression of the extracellular genes and overexpression of the HOXA genes in an MDS case can be considered as a risk factor. Because transition into AML is more likely for such an MDS case, a monitoring assay can be developed based on these signatures.
        
        
          Validating AML signatures in an independent dataset
          We validated the performance of the tree on classifying 74 cases in the BCCA dataset. To this end, we inferred the values of extracellular matrix and HOXA&B eigengenes in the BCCA dataset (Methods). With the same above-mentioned thresholds that performed well for the MILE dataset, the tree correctly identified 51 (98%) of the AML-NK and 20 (91%) of the MDS cases. The high accuracy of our decision tree was helpful in correcting a clerical error in annotating the dataset. In particular, two BCCA cases (B118 and B129), originally labeled with MDS, have signatures very similar to AML (Additional file 5: Table S4). Interestingly, a second review revealed that their correct diagnosis is in fact tAML (therapy–related AML) and AML–M1, respectively.
          Although the decision tree was trained using only AML-NK subtype in the MILE dataset, its performance in differentiating some other subtypes of AML from MDS in the BCCA dataset is remarkable. In particular, all of the four AML-t(8;21) cases (100%), all of the four AML cases with complex karyotype cases (100%), all of the four AML cases with 11q23 abnormality (100%), and 9 out of 11 AML-inv(16) cases (82%) are all correctly classified as AML. However, cases from other subtypes, such as AML-t(15;17), AML-M6, and tAML, do not always show strong extracellular or HOXA&B signatures of AML-NK and are frequently misclassified as MDS (Additional file 6: Table S5). This is expected, because these three subtypes of AML are distinct and too different from AML-NK. In particular, leukemic cells in AML-t(15;17) and AML-M6 are relatively more differentiated [34], and may produce some extracellular matrix proteins.
        
      
      
        A minimal gene set for clinical testing
        Considering the good performance of the decision tree, it is useful to develop a clinical test based on gene expression. The extracellular matrix and HOXA&B modules contain 113 and 42 genes, respectively. To infer the corresponding eigengenes, the expression of 155 genes are needed in total. If the number of genes is reduced without significant loss of accuracy, the test will be easier to use in clinical settings. Because the genes are correlated with each other in each module, shrinking the tree is expected to have little—or no—effect on the accuracy of classification.
        Using a greedy approach, we excluded the majority of the 155 genes, and obtained a decision tree that need the expression values of only 14 genes (9%) (). The performance of the reduced tree is comparable to the original tree (Table 1). On the training set, the accuracy dropps by only 5% for AML and by 2% for MDS. On the test set, however, the reduced tree is as accurate as the full tree (Additional file 6: Table S5).
        The list of 14 genes used in the reduces tree included PGLYRP1, MMP9, CEACAM6, ARG1, MMP8, ANXA3, RGL4, SLPI, HP, CEACAM1, MGAM, SYNE1 from the extracellular matrix module, and HOXB-AS3 and HOXA3 from HOXA&B module (Fig. 7).
Fig. 7Comparing the expression of the 14 genes used in the reduced tree. Expression of the 14 genes that contribute to the reduced (compact) decision tree in the a MILE and b BCCA datasets are shown. The 12 extracellular matrix and the two HOXA genes are generally silenced and overexpressed in AML, respectively

      
      
        The significance of the extracellular matrix pathway in AML
        The relationship between HOX genes and AML and their role in leukemogenesis are extensively studied [27, 27, 28]. Researchers have also explained the significance of the extracellular matrix pathway in the prognosis of cancers in general [35]. However, its role in the development of AML and other leukemias is more complicated. In addition to regulating cell growth [36], proliferation [37], differentiation [38], and apoptosis [39], it also mediates the migration of hematopoietic stem cells through the vessels [40]. Module 12 is enriched with extracellular matrix genes (Additional file 1: Figure S8). We investigated these genes, which defined a significant signature in our decision tree (Fig. 4).
        Gene Ontology Cellular Component (GO-CC) analysis showed that 36 of 113 genes in module 12 code for proteins in the extracellular region (Additional file 1: Figure S8 and Additional file 7: Table S7). Moreover, 77 of the genes in this module are associated with at least one of the following categories: extracellular vesicular exosome (44 genes), extracellular region (36), extracellular space (30 genes), and plasma membrane (31 genes). We noted that 18 genes (16%) are located on chromosome 19. Almost all of these 113 genes are underexpressed in AML (Fig. 5 and Additional file 1: Figure S6). The enriched biological processes include: immune system process (adjusted p-value <10−9), killing by host of symbiont cells (<10−3), killing of cells in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction (<10−2), defense response to fungus (<10−3), antibacterial humoral response (<10−2), extracellular matrix disassembly (<10−2), and response to lipopolysaccharide (<10−2) (Additional file 8: Table S9) [41].
        One particularly interesting gene from this module was MMP9, which had a relatively high contribution to the eigengene. Its weight is 0.92, the highest in the extracellular matrix pathway (Reactome [42]), and the eighth in the module (Additional file 7: Table S7). MMP9 is a member of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family, which has 23 members.
        They remodel and degrade the extracellular matrix by cleaving its components [42]. In addition to MMP9, this module includes two other members of MMP family, namely MMP8 (weight = 0.91) and MMP25 (weight = 0.87). All of these three genes are underexpressed in AML (Additional file 1: Figure S9a). One way to confirm that these genes are silenced in AML would be to check epigenetic factors such as DNA methylation, which generally anticorrelates with gene expression [43]. We compared 194 AML cases of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (LAML) dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) with 368 control cases, and we confirmed that these three genes were heavily methylated in AML (Additional file 1: Figure S9b and Additional file 9).
      
      
        Validating gene expression changes at the protein level
        Given the strong discriminating capability of extracellular matrix gene expression in differentiating AML from MDS (Fig. 4), we attempted to determine whether a simple immunohistochemical stain would provide such a differentiation. We selected MMP9 to test this, as it provided the highest-weighted contribution to the eigengene (0.92) within the extracellular matrix set of genes. We obtained 10 previously diagnosed AML cases and 10 previously diagnosed MDS cases, and performed immunostaining on the diagnostic bone marrow biopsies. As seen in Fig. 8, MMP9 staining is drastically lower in the AML samples compared to the MDS cases.
Fig. 8Expression of MMP9 in AML and MDS. The bone marrow of 10 patients with AML (upper panels) and 10 patients with MDS lower panels) was immunostained in parallel with an MMP9 antibody. MMP9 expression is reduced to absent in AML blasts. Where staining is seen in AML, it is only present in mature myeloid cells but not leukemic cells

      
      
        Validating the identified coexpression pattern in other AML-related datasets
        The 113 genes in the extracellular matrix module are correlated and underexpressed in AML. To validate that the observed coexpression pattern is specifically associated with AML, we investigated the expression of these 113 genes in a large collection of human datasets. Specifically, we used Search-Based Exploration of Expression Compendium (SEEK) [44] to objectively compare the coexpression of these genes across a collection of 5210 datasets. SEEK automatically scored and ranked the datasets based on the significance of coexpression of our 113 genes. SEEK also computed empirical p-values to assess the statistical significance of scores. Specifically, random scores for each dataset was computed based on 5000 queries of 113 random genes, and a p-value was reported as the fraction of random scores that were higher than the reported score. The collection contains 61 AML-related datasets (1.2%), which mostly score high in the ranked list (Additional file 10: Table S8). In particular, all of the five top datasets are related to AML (GEO accession numbers: GSE15434 [45], GSE16015 [46], GSE12417 [47], GSE21261 [48], and GSE30599 [49]; with 251, 107, 405, 96, and 29 samples, respectively). The coexpression scores are 0.31, 0.29, 0.28, 0.28, and 0.27, respectively; and the adjusted empirical p-values are smaller than 10−37 for each of these five datasets. A hypergeometric test confirmed that the coexpression of the queried genes is significantly associated with AML (p-value <10−9). Thereby, our unbiased and objective SEEK analysis indicates that these genes define an expression signature that is specific to AML.
      
      
        Generalizability to studying other cancers
        The described pipeline can also be applied to analyze other types of cancers and answer different biological questions. To demonstrate this, we applied our approach to a prognostic question in breast cancer research. Is it possible to identify low-risk breast cancer cases based solely on gene expression and thereby avoid overtreating a subset of patients who likely would not benefit from the additional toxic therapy [50]? In this type of prognostic setting, the emphasis lies on achieving very high specificity for predicted low-risk cases. For instance, the TRANSBIG Consortium [51] considers a test to be clinically practicable and reliable for ER+ breast cancer only if at least 88% of cases classified as low-risk have more than a 10-year overall survival. However, the only clinical test with such high precision is Oncotype DX, which is applicable to only one clinical subtype of breast cancer, stage I ER+ tumors [50]. Unfortunately, this method cannot be generalized to other breast cancer subtypes [52].
        We analyzed 1374 ER+ cases from three datasets to train and validate our model (Methods and Additional file 1: Note S4). The low-risk specificity of our model is above 89% for all three datasets (Table 3 and Additional file 1: Figure S11). Two modules with 319 and 193 genes, respectively, were automatically selected (Additional file 11: Table S6). The larger module is associated with the mitotic cell cycle (p-value <10−71) and chromosome segregation (p-value <10−28). This module has 16 genes in common with the genes in the PAM50 assay, which is widely used in clinical settings to identify breast cancer subtypes [53]. These common genes include UBE2T, BIRC5, CCNB1, CEP55, MELK, UBE2C, CENPF, PTTG1, EXO1, ANLN, CCNE1 CDC20, MKI67, KIF2C, MAPT, and FGFR4. This is a significant overlap (p-value of the hypergeometric test <10−10).
Table 3Accuracy of predicting breast cancer riskDatasetMETABRIC discoveryMETABRIC validationMILLER (test)Low riskHigh riskLow riskHigh riskLow riskHigh riskPredicted low risk157 (94%)11 (7%)107 (89%)13 (11%)68 (93%)5 (7%)Predicted medium risk278 (68%)134 (33%)236 (70%)99 (30%)55 (68%)26 (32%)Predicted high risk21 (35%)39 (65%)33 (42%)46 (58%)29 (62%)18 (38%)The confusion matrices show the performance of our decision tree on three datasets. The percentage of predicted cases with respect to the total number of predictions in each group is shown in parentheses. From a clinical standpoint, it is important to achieve a high precision (positive predictive value) for low risk cases (shown in bold) to confidently recommend a less agressive treatment regimen for a subset of patients. The probability of surviving more than 10 years is above 89% for the predicted low risk cases in all the three datasets (Additional file 1: Figure S11)

        The smaller module is associated with translational control (Additional file 1: Figure S12). The expression of the majority of the genes (122, 63%) is correlated with poor prognosis. Notable genes include AKT1, GSK3B, MTOR, RAF1, and SRC from the epidermal growth factor receptor (ErbB) signaling pathway [54]. In contrast, the high expression of 71 genes (37%) in this module—including 16 ribosome-related genes such as RPL22, RPL26, RPS27, RPS27A, RPL13A, RPL21 and RPLP0—correlate with good prognosis. This may be predicted, as the loss of function or abnormal expression of proteins involved in ribosomal biogenesis is associated with activation of the tumor suppressor p53 pathway [55, 56]. A possible mechanism of p53 activation could be through binding free (non-ribosome-bound) ribosomal proteins with MDM2, which modulates the inhibitory activity of MDM2 on p53 [55].
        None of the 193 genes from the smaller module is in common with PAM50. This suggests that the corresponding eigengene can be considered as a novel biological signature to assess breast cancer prognosis, and it can be a basis for improving clinical tests. Overall, our model is biologically plausible because regulated cell cycle and controlled translation are generally associated with better prognostic outcome [57].
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Biological processes in a cell often require coordination between multiple genes and proteins, not just one gene or a single protein. Accordingly, we used network analysis to delineate the differences in gene expression profiles of AML and MDS in a systematic and robust way (Additional file 1: Note S1). We compared the expression at the module level to minimize the effect of artifacts such as a random change in expression of an isolated gene and other biological or technical noise (Additional file 1: Figure S10).
      The results of our study underline the association of the extracellular matrix pathway with AML, and also confirm that the overexpression of homeobox genes is a biological characteristic of AML. These two signatures are biologically related [58]. Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that regulate the development of body structures during the embryonic period [59]. They also have key roles in adult tissue remodeling and pathogenesis [60]. In particular, specific homeobox genes can regulate the extracellular matrix through the expression of matrix-degrading proteinases [61]. For instance, the expression of the HOXA3 and HOXB3 are upregulated during wound healing to remodel the extracellular matrix and to increase endothelial cell migration [62]. Overexpression of HOXA7, which is associated with poor prognosis of AML [63], can modify the interactions between hematopoietic progenitor cells and the extracellular matrix in the bone marrow. This alteration can be responsible for blocking the differentiation process in AML cells [64].
      The two signatures are highly associated with AML to such a degree that they can be used to design an accurate clinical test for differential diagnosis between AML and MDS. Furthermore, the following confirmatory evidence supports our findings on the significance of the extracellular matrix pathway in AML: 
Our decision tree can accurately predict the diagnosis in a validating dataset (BCCA) without the need to change the parameters that were fitted to the training dataset (MILE). Our results confirm that the model was not overfitted to the training dataset.SEEK analysis confirms that the genes in the extracellular matrix module are coexpressed in several other AML-related datasets.The three MMP genes in the extracellular matrix, MMP9, MMP8, and MMP25, are methylated in AML.Immunocytochemistry showed that MMP9 is underexpressed in AML at the protein level.

      
MMP9 is an important gene in our analysis, and it has a distinct expression profile between the two diseases. MMP9 acts as a cell surface transducer by cleaving the extracellular matrix and other proteins, including chemokines, cytokines, and growth factor receptors. In this way, it can regulate key signaling pathways in cell growth, migration, invasion, inflammation, and angiogenesis [65]. While MMP9 was previously reported to have a critical role in AML invasion and metastasis [66–69], the relationship between its expression and the prognosis of hematological malignancies is complicated. For instance, Aref et al. report that 43 pretreatment AML cases had significantly lower expression of MMP9 as compared to 10 controls. However, after chemotherapy, MMP9 was expressed significantly higher in relapsed cases as compared to complete remission cases [70].
      In this context, the high expression of MMP9 in MDS, which we showed is more than AML, is interesting. Correspondingly, Travaglino et al. measured MMP2 and MMP9 in myeloid cells of 143 MDS cases using immunocytochemistry. They found that high MMP levels are associated with longer overall survival [71]. One possible interpretation is that by deregulating the extracellular matrix, MMP9 may interrupt the survival signalling in MDS and lead to apoptosis. In contrast, lowering MMP9 expression may prolong the life of the MDS cells and facilitate the transition into AML. MMP9 processing of the matrix may also have an impact on blast cell invasion, dissemination, and homing [70]. However, functional studies will be needed to determine the mechanism and impact of MMP9 on myeloid cancers. A competing theory would be that the observed differences in the extracellular matrix activity might be due to differences in the underlying cell-types.
      Our approach has novel methodological contributions to gene expression analysis. While other scholars have used weights (loadings) of eigengenes to study genes in a module [24], we are the first to use values of eigengenes directly as biological signatures. We developed an approach to infer and compare eigengenes across datasets. Our approach is fundamentally different from applying PCA directly on the entire expression profile, which is not a promising approach because the first few PCs may not have enough information on the modules’ structure [25].
      An analysis based on a limited number of genes with the best p-value can be convoluted by random, dramatic expression changes due to biological or technical noise [17]. In contrast, because an eigengene is a weighted average expression of several genes, our systematic and holistic approach is much more robust than the alternative approaches that select one or a few genes from each module [72, 73]. We show that our methodology is generalizable and useful in studying other malignancies by applying it to several breast cancer datasets.
    
    
      Conclusions
      Eigengenes are robust informative biological signatures. They are useful in predicting the diagnosis and prognosis, and also, in delineating the molecular characteristics of diseases. For instance, we used large-scale network analysis to show that underexpression of particular genes in the extracellular matrix pathway is a specific characteristic of AML.
    
    
      Methods
      
        The AML gene expression datasets
        We downloaded the expression profiles of 202 AML-NK and 164 MDS cases from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (series number GSE15061) [16], Additional file 12. The dataset is part of the expression MIcroarray analysis for diagnosis of LEukaemia (MILE) series. For simplicity, we refer to this expression profile as the MILE dataset, which was used to train our model. To validate our model and test the accuracy of classification, we used RNA-Seq data from 133 AML and 22 MDS cases analyzed at British Columbia Cancer Agency. For simplicity, we refer to this expression profile as the BCCA dataset, which is independent from the MILE dataset. From the 133 AML cases, 52 were AML-NK and thus were comparable with the 202 cases from the MILE dataset (Additional file 6: Table S5). We used Sailfish (version 0.6.3) [74] to compute reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM) values [75] for each gene, and considered the natural logarithm of RPKM to measure gene expression.
      
      
        Breast cancer datasets
        We used 640 ER+ cases from the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) [76] discovery dataset for training. We evaluated the resulting model on 533 different cases from the METABRIC validation dataset. We also validated the prognostic value of the inferred biological signatures using 201 cases from a second independent dataset produced by Miller et al. [77] (GEO accession number GSE3494). The details of our analysis on these three datasets is presented in Additional file 1: Note S4.
      
      
        Detailed description of the Pigengene methodology
        
Preprocessing The input to the Pigengene methodology includes two gene expression profiles corresponding to two biological conditions (e.g., AML and MDS in this paper). Optionally, the user can provide a validating dataset (e.g., BCCA dataset). The train and validation datasets do not need to be assayed using the same platform. Thas is, one dataset can be microarray and the other one can be RNA-Seq. Figure 1 shows the main steps of the Pigengene methodology. More specificity, the first step of the analysis is to exclude the genes that have too little variation or negligible expression across the conditions. This can be done using a differential expressed analysis, which computes a p-value for each gene with the null hypothesis that it is similarly expressed in the two conditions. Consistent with the common approach in the gene network analysis [78, 79], we kept only the top one-third genes with the best p-values in our analysis.
        
Constructing the coexpression network: We used the WGCNA package to construct a coexpression gene network, in which each node (vertex) is a gene and the edge (connection) between two genes is weighted based on the correlation between their expression values (Additional file 1: Note S2). WGCNA uses a hierarchical clustering approach to identify gene modules from the coexpression network.
        
Computing eigengenes: We used principal component analysis (PCA) to compute an eigengene for each module. First, we balanced the number of AML and MDS cases using oversampling, so that both disease types had comparable representatives in the analysis. Specifically, we repeated the data of each AML and MDS case 9 and 11 times, and obtained 1818 and 1804 samples from each type, respectively. Then, we applied the moduleEigengenes() function from the WGCNA package on the oversampled data. We ran it with the default parameters, and computed an eigengene for each of the modules identified earlier. This function computed the first principal component of each module, which maximized the explained variance ensuring the loss in the biological information was minimized. [24, 29] (Additional file 5: Table S4).
        
Inferring the decision tree: We use eigengenes as features to infer a decision tree (R package C50 version 0.1.0-24) [32]. While the C50 package uses a heuristic approach to select the best set of features, its default arguments does not result in optimal performance when too many features are provided. The solutions include: 1) using a Bayesian network to determine the relationships of the modules with each other and with the type of hematological malignancy (Additional file 1: Note S3) [31], 2) using a feature scoring algorithm such as FeaLect [80], and 3) adjusting the C50 parameters, for example, enforcing the number of samples in each node to be at least 10%. The first and the third solutions are implemented in the Pigengene package through the bnNum argument of the one.step.pigengene() function and the minPerLeaf argument of the make.decision.tree() function, respectively. These two approaches resulted in the same decision tree presented in this paper (Fig. 4).
        
Inferring the values of eigengenes in an independent dataset: When a validation dataset is available (i.e., the BCCA dataset in our study), the values of the eigengenes need to be inferred in the validation dataset. We computed eigengenes using the MILE dataset, which is a microarray dataset. It was challenging to compute the values of the same eigengenes for BCCA cases because the BCCA dataset was produced using a different platform (i.e., RNA-Seq) [19]. The simple approach of applying PCA on the BCCA data would fail; It would result in different weights (loadings), and the eigengenes would not be comparable between the two datasets. Instead, we inferred the values of the eigengenes for BCCA cases using the same weights obtained from the MILE dataset. Specifically, for each module, we identified the genes that are common in both datasets. Then, we scaled the expression of those genes by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. We used the scaled expression values to compute the eigengene (the weighted average of expression) for each BCCA case. The project.eigen() function from our Pigengene package facilitates this approach.
        
Reducing the number of genes needed for the decision tree: Our decision tree used the eigengenes of HOXA&B and extracellular matrix modules, which were weighted averages of the expression of 42 and 155 genes, respectively. To reduce the number of genes, we repeated the following greedy procedure [72]: We excluded the gene with the lowest absolute weight, inferred the eigengenes using the remaining genes, and used the updated eigengenes as input to the decision tree. In each iteration, we used the same tree structure and thresholds, and we measured the accuracy of classification. We repeated this procedure until the tree needed only 14 genes, because excluding any more genes would result in a significant decline in the accuracy of the classification. The sufficiency of these 14 related genes indicates that they contain the core biological information needed for classification. The compact.tree() function from our Pigengene package facilitates this approach.
      
      
        Code availability
        “Pigengene”, a documented R package that implements our approach, is publicly available through Bioconductor: http://bioconductor.org/packages/Pigengene. The results presented in this paper can be reproduced using version 0.99.19. To apply our methodology in other studies, we strongly recommend using the most recent version. We encourage users to use the Bioconductor mailing list to send bug reports and seek technical help.
      
    
  
        
          Background
          Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic auto-inflammatory disorder of joints. The present study aimed to identify the key genes in RA for better understanding the underlying mechanisms of RA.
        
        
          Methods
          The integrated analysis of expression profiling was conducted to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in RA. Moreover, functional annotation, protein–protein interaction (PPI) network and transcription factor (TF) regulatory network construction were applied for exploring the potential biological roles of DEGs in RA. In addition, the expression level of identified candidate DEGs was preliminarily detected in peripheral blood cells of RA patients in the GSE17755 dataset. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was conducted to validate the expression levels of identified DEGs in RA.
        
        
          Results
          A total of 378 DEGs, including 202 up- and 176 down-regulated genes, were identified in synovial tissues of RA patients compared with healthy controls. DEGs were significantly enriched in axon guidance, RNA transport and MAPK signaling pathway. RBFOX2, LCK and SERBP1 were the hub proteins in the PPI network. In the TF-target gene network, RBFOX2, POU6F1, WIPF1 and PFKFB3 had the high connectivity with TFs. The expression status of 11 candidate DEGs was detected in GSE17755, the expression levels of MAT2A and NSA2 were significantly down-regulated and CD47 had the up-regulated tendency in peripheral blood cells of patients with RA compared with healthy individuals. qRT-PCR results of MAT2A, NSA2, CD47 were compatible with our bioinformatics analyses.
        
        
          Discussion
          Our study might provide valuable information for exploring the pathogenesis mechanism of RA and identifying the potential biomarkers for RA diagnosis.
        
      
    
      Introduction
      Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoinflammatory disorder of joints, which is characterized by irreversible joint damage and destruction of cartilage and bone, leading to severe disability or even premature death (Aletaha et al., 2010). It affects approximately 1% of the population worldwide, and reduces life expectancy of patients by 3–18 years. There are 25–50 new cases in a population of 100,000 worldwide each year (Gibofsky, 2014; Pincus & Callahan, 1986; Michelsen et al., 2015).
      The etiology and pathophysiology of RA are not well understood (McInnes & Schett, 2011). It is widely acknowledged that RA is triggered by the complex interaction among genetic susceptibility, autoimmune disorders and dysregulated genes.
      For genetic susceptibility, several studies have demonstrated that expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) increase the risk of RA. A recent study indicates that HLA-DOA rs369150-A polymorphism reduces the expression of HLA-DOA, which independently associates with RA risk in the Japanese population, Asian population (Chinese and Korean) and European population (Okada et al., 2016). eQTL of GZMB identifies higher expression in the presence of the minor allele of rs8192916, which is associated with progression of joint destruction in RA (Knevel et al., 2013). For dysregulated genes, down-regulation of miR-126 inhibits PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and disrupts the imbalance between cell growth and cell death of rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibro-blasts by targeting PIK3R2 (Gao et al., 2016). Over-expression of TLR-2 and IL-6 decrease the expression of FCRL4, might contribute to the RA process (Khanzadeh et al., 2016; Eser & Sahin, 2016).
      Previous studies demonstrate that early diagnosis and treatment will be beneficial to reduction of progressive joint injury of patients with RA. Currently, several biomarkers such as citrullinated proteins, rheumatoid factor, S100 proteins, matrix metalloproteinases and serum amyloid proteins have been described (Smolen, Aletaha & McInnes, 2016), but these biomarkers have limitations on sensitivity and or specificity in routine clinical practice. The early diagnosis of RA remains challenging.
      In this study, we used bioinformatics methods to integrate mRNA expression datasets, which were available in the Gene Expression Omnibus database, identified DEGs in synovial tissues of patients with RA and healthy individuals, aiming to investigate the potential pathogenesis mechanism of RA and provide valuable information for the identification of potential diagnosis biomarkers in RA.
    
    
      Materials and Methods
      
        Data collection
        NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database provides a large collection of microarray expression data (Edgar, Domrachev & Lash, 2002). “Rheumatoid Arthritis” was used as the key word to search expression profiling of RA. The inclusion criteria of datasets were set as follows: (1) whole genome expression data of RA; (2) the expression profiling of synovial tissues was generated from patients with RA and healthy individuals.
        Total of nine mRNA expression datasets of synovial tissues of RA were incorporated into our study. Four datasets were based on GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array, four datasets were based on GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array, and one dataset was based on GPL91 [HG_U95A] Affymetrix Human Genome U95A Array.
      
      
        Data preprocessing and Identification of DEGs
        The raw expression datasets were downloaded and preprocessed by log2 transformation in R language (Shi et al., 2006). The Linear Models “limma” package in R language was used to analyze the microarray datasets (Smyth, 2005). Differentially expressed genes were identified in patients with RA compared to healthy individuals. The false discovery rate (FDR) (Reiner-Benaim, 2007) was utilized for multiple testing corrections by using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. FDR < 0.05 was set as the threshold of DEGs.
      
      
        Heatmap analysis
        To assess the similarity of gene expression patterns between two samples, two-way hierarchical clustering analysis (Cao, 2016) was performed. The heatmap was constructed using ‘pheatmap’ package in R language.
      
      
        Functional annotation of DEGs
        The significantly dysregulated genes between patients with RA and healthy individuals were filtered as DEGs. In order to understand the biological roles of DEGs, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway and Gene Ontology (GO) terms were enriched by the online tool GeneCoDis3 (Kanehisa, 2002; Carmona-Saez et al., 2007; Torto-Alalibo et al., 2014). The threshold of GO function and KEGG pathway enrichment were FDR < 0.05.
      
      
        Protein–protein interaction network
        In order to explore the interaction between the top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in synovial tissues of patients with RA, BioGRID, a database of known protein interactions, was used to predict the PPI association among DEGs and the PPI interaction network was visualized by Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003; Chatr-Aryamontri et al., 2015).
      
      
        Construction of transcription factors regulatory network
        TRANSFAC (Wingender et al., 1996) is a database covering details of TFs and their DNA binding sites. In our analysis, the TFs in the human genome and the motifs of genomic binding sites were downloaded from the TRANSFAC. Moreover, the 2 KB sequence in the upstream promoter region of top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs was downloaded from UCSC (http://www.genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTables). Target sites of potential TFs were then distinguished. The TFs and its target genes were used for constructing regulatory network, and the network was visualized by Cytoscape software (http://cytoscape.org/) (Shannon et al., 2003). Nodes represented TFs or target genes and lines represented association between TFs and target genes.
      
      
        The DEGs were analyzed in the GSE17755 datasets
        We obtained a number of key DEGs in RA synovial tissues based on the bioinformatics analyses. In order to analyze whether those DEGs were dysregulated in peripheral blood cells of patients with RA, the expression levels of representative DEGs were preliminarily validated in the expression profiling of peripheral blood cells of patients with RA from the publicly available GEO dataset. “Rheumatoid arthritis” was used as the key word to search the expression profiling in the GEO database. The mRNA expression profiling datasets were included based on the following criteria: (1) the dataset was generated from the peripheral blood cells of patients with RA; (2) The expression profiling of peripheral blood cells of RA patients and healthy individuals were available in the dataset; (3) the RA patients had no treatment record before peripheral blood cells collection. Finally, GSE17755 and GSE15573 were left. A total of 18 patients with RA and 15 healthy individuals were included in the GSE15573 datasets, which had the smaller sample size compared to GSE17755. There were 112 patients with RA and 45 healthy individuals in GSE17755 dataset. Based on aforementioned information, GSE17755 was incorporated into ours study (Lee et al., 2011). Box-plot analysis was performed to preliminarily detect the expression levels of DEGs in peripheral blood cells of RA patients and health individuals.
      
      
        Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
        In order to validate the expression levels of candidate genes in RA, 10 peripheral blood samples were collected from RA patients, who were diagnosed at the Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital. Moreover, 10 matched peripheral blood samples were collected from healthy individuals. This work was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Zhonghan Hospital and informed written consent was obtained from all patients. The research complied with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
        Total RNA of peripheral blood samples were extracted by using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacture instructions. FastQuant cDNA Synthesis Kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China) was used to synthesize the cDNA of mRNA. qRT-PCR reactions were performed by using SuperReal PreMix Plus SYBR Green Kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China) on Applied Biosystems 7500 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). GAPDH were used as internal control for mRNA detection. The PCR primers used in our study were shown as follows: GAPDH forward primer 5′ GGA GCG AGA TCC CTC CAA AAT 3′, reverse primer 5′ GGC TGT TGT CAT ACT TCT CAT GG 3′; MAT2A forward primer 5′ ATG AAC GGA CAG CTC AAC GG 3′, reverse primer 5′ CCA GCA AGA AGG ATC ATT CCA G 3′; NSA2 forward primer 5′ CAC CGT AAA CGC TAT GGA TAC C 3′, reverse primer 5′ GCT TAG CCT TCA GAC CAA TCA TT 3′; CD47 forward primer 5′ TCC GGT GGT ATG GAT GAG AAA 3′, reverse primer 5′ ACC AAG GCC AGT AGC ATT CTT 3′. At least triple experiments were subjected to qRT-PCR verification. The relative expression of candidate genes was calculated by using the ΔCT equation methods. Mean ± standard deviation and independent-samples t-test was used in the statistical analysis. P < 0.05 was considered as significant difference. * indicated P < 0.05; ** indicated P < 0.01.
      
    
    
      Results
      
        Differentially expressed genes in RA
        Nine mRNA expression profiles of RA synovial tissues, including 168 patients with RA and 41 healthy individuals, were incorporated into our study (Table 1). In our analysis, a total of 378 DEGs including 202 up- and 176 down-regulated genes were identified in patients with RA compared to healthy individuals. LCK and MAT2A were the most significantly up- and down-regulated genes in RA, respectively (Table 2). The expression pattern of the top 200 DEGs in RA patients and healthy individuals was shown in Fig. 1, which indicated that the mRNA expression profiling of synovial tissues of RA patients was different from healthy individuals.
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/table-1
          Table 1
          
            The expression profiling of patients with RA and normal controls.
          
          
            
            
              
                
                
                
                
                
                
              
              
                
                  GEO ID
                  Sample (N:P)
                  Platform
                  Year
                  Author
                  Country
                
              
              
                
                  
GSE77298

                  7:16
                  GPL570[HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array
                  2016
                  Mathijs G.A. Broeren
                  Netherlands
                
                
                  
GSE48780

                  0: 83
                  GPL570[HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array
                  2014
                  Sarah K. Kummerfeld
                  USA
                
                
                  
GSE55235

                  10:10
                  GPL96[HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array
                  2014
                  Thomas Häupl
                  Germany
                
                
                  
GSE55457

                  10:13
                  GPL96[HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array
                  2014
                  Raimund W. Kinne
                  Germany
                
                
                  
GSE55584

                  0:10
                  GPL96[HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array
                  2014
                  Woetzel D
                  Germany
                
                
                  
GSE36700

                  0:7
                  GPL570[HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array
                  2012
                  Bernard Robert Lauwerys
                  Belgium
                
                
                  
GSE24742

                  0:12
                  GPL570[HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array
                  2010
                  Bernard Robert Lauwerys
                  Belgium
                
                
                  
GSE12021

                  9:12
                  GPL96[HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array
                  2008
                  René Huber
                  Germany
                
                
                  
GSE1919

                  5:5
                  GPL91[HG_U95A] Affymetrix Human Genome U95A Array
                  2004
                  Ungethuem U
                  Germany
                
              
            
          
          
            
              
                Notes.
              
            
            
              
TITLE RArheumatoid arthritis Nnormal control Ppatients

            
          
        
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/table-2
          Table 2
          
            The top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in RA.
          
          
            
            
              
                
                
                
                
                
              
              
                
                  Gene ID
                  Gene Symbol
                  p-Value
                  FDR
                  Regulation
                
              
              
                
                  
                    Top 10 up-regulated DEGs
                  
                
                
                  3932
                  LCK
                  0
                  0
                  Up
                
                
                  6964
                  TRD
                  1.65645E–13
                  4.7104E–10
                  Up
                
                
                  26135
                  SERBP1
                  1.95311E–10
                  3.33239E–07
                  Up
                
                
                  8711
                  TNK1
                  2.47189E–09
                  3.01253E–06
                  Up
                
                
                  7456
                  WIPF1
                  3.19709E–08
                  2.72744E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  5209
                  PFKFB3
                  3.67501E–08
                  2.85014E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  23543
                  RBFOX2
                  6.50956E–08
                  3.7022E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  56681
                  SAR1A
                  7.13709E–08
                  3.80541E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  961
                  CD47
                  8.72732E–08
                  4.13626E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  9669
                  EIF5B
                  9.36124E–08
                  4.20319E–05
                  Up
                
                
                  
                    Top 10 down-regulated DEGs
                  
                
                
                  4144
                  MAT2A
                  1.27898E–13
                  4.7104E–10
                  Down
                
                
                  1388
                  ATF6B
                  9.32052E–11
                  1.98783E–07
                  Down
                
                
                  26148
                  C10orf12
                  6.51139E–10
                  9.25812E–07
                  Down
                
                
                  6949
                  TCOF1
                  5.24047E–09
                  5.58831E–06
                  Down
                
                
                  2516
                  NR5A1
                  8.37334E–09
                  7.937E–06
                  Down
                
                
                  6897
                  TARS
                  4.75819E–08
                  3.12247E–05
                  Down
                
                
                  5463
                  POU6F1
                  4.41294E–08
                  3.12247E–05
                  Down
                
                
                  10412
                  NSA2
                  5.26449E–08
                  3.20795E–05
                  Down
                
                
                  763
                  CA5A
                  8.50556E–08
                  4.13626E–05
                  Down
                
                
                  23387
                  SIK3
                  1.4221E–07
                  5.77712E–05
                  Down
                
              
            
          
          
            
              
                Notes.
              
            
            
              
TITLE RArheumatoid arthritis DEGsdifferentially expressed genes FDRfalse discovery rate

            
          
        
      
      
        GO classification of DEGs in RA
        DEGs in patients with RA were performed to GO annotation for investigating the biological roles. The threshold of the GO terms was set as FDR < 0.001. As Table 3 shown, RNA splicing (GO: 0007585), signal transduction (GO: 0007165) and gene expression (GO: 0010467) were the highly significant enrichment of the GO biological process. Furthermore, protein binding (GO: 0005515), nucleotide binding (GO: 0000166) and ATP binding (GO: 0005524) were the highest enrichment of the GO molecular function.
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/table-3
          Table 3
          
            GO annotation of dysregulated DEGs in RA.
          
          
            
            
              
                
                
                
                
              
              
                
                  GO Items
                  GO terms
                  Genes
                  FDR
                
              
              
                
                  
                    Biological process
                  
                
                
                  GO:0008380
                  RNA splicing
                  19
                  9.89E–08
                
                
                  GO:0007165
                  Signal transduction
                  35
                  2.39E–05
                
                
                  GO:0010467
                  Gene expression
                  19
                  3.43E–05
                
                
                  GO:0016477
                  Cell migration
                  10
                  5.30E–05
                
                
                  GO:0006397
                  mRNA processing
                  13
                  5.31E–05
                
                
                  GO:0000398
                  Nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome
                  12
                  5.64E–05
                
                
                  GO:0045944
                  Positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter
                  21
                  0.00018566
                
                
                  GO:0046777
                  Protein autophosphorylation
                  10
                  0.00062775
                
                
                  GO:0006355
                  Regulation of transcription, DNA-dependent
                  37
                  0.00104687
                
                
                  GO:0070934
                  CRD-mediated mRNA stabilization
                  3
                  0.00127416
                
                
                  
                    Molecular Function
                  
                
                
                  GO:0005515
                  Protein binding
                  162
                  4.77E–48
                
                
                  GO:0000166
                  Nucleotide binding
                  66
                  3.56E–13
                
                
                  GO:0005524
                  ATP binding
                  45
                  3.29E–08
                
                
                  GO:0003677
                  DNA binding
                  47
                  7.84E–07
                
                
                  GO:0003723
                  RNA binding
                  22
                  8.07E–05
                
                
                  GO:0003676
                  Nucleic acid binding
                  25
                  0.000137
                
                
                  GO:0003724
                  RNA helicase activity
                  4
                  0.000148
                
                
                  GO:0003713
                  Transcription coactivator activity
                  12
                  0.000202
                
                
                  GO:0003700
                  Sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity
                  26
                  0.000207
                
                
                  GO:0004497
                  Monooxygenase activity
                  7
                  0.000214
                
              
            
          
          
            
              
                Notes.
              
            
            
              
TITLE DEGsdifferentially expressed genes FDRfalse discovery rate RArheumatoid arthritis

            
          
        
      
      
        Pathway enrichment analysis
        KEGG analysis was used to understand the signaling pathway enrichment of DEGs in RA. The threshold was FDR < 0.05. As Table 4 shown, the significant enrichment of pathways focused on axon guidance (hsa04360), RNA transport (hsa03013), protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum (hsa04141) and MAPK signaling pathway (hsa04010).
      
      
        Protein-protein interaction network
        The PPI network between the top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in RA were constructed by Cytoscape based on the BioGRID database (Fig. 2). The network consisted of 419 nodes and 480 edges. In the network, the nodes with high degree were defined as hub proteins. The hub proteins in the PPI network including RBFOX2 (degree = 90), LCK (degree = 78), SERBP1 (degree = 45), TCOF1 (degree = 36) and TARS (degree = 32), as Fig. 2 shown. A total of 402 predicted proteins interaction with top 10 up- and down-regulated were overlapped with 202 up- and 168 down-regulated DEGs, respectively. Lastly, 15 DEGs interacted with top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs were obtained and their interactions were shown in Table S2. RBFOX2 interacted with 6 dysregulated DEGs including DDX5, ATN1, ESR2, RPA2, RRPA3 and ATXN2; LCK interacted with WASL; SERBP1 interacted with PIAS1; TCOF1 interacted with RPA2, RPA3, TOP1 and NOP56.
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/fig-1
          Figure 1
          
            Hierarchical clustering analysis based on the expression profile of the top 200 discriminatory DEGs between synovial tissues of RA and normal controls.
            The color scale illustrated the relative expression level of mRNA across all samples; red color represented an expression level above mean, green color represented expression lower than the mean.
          
          
        
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/table-4
          Table 4
          
            KEGG enrichment of dysregulated DEGs in RA.
          
          
            
            
              
                
                
                
                
              
              
                
                  KEGG ID
                  KEGG terms
                  FDR
                  Genes
                
              
              
                
                  hsa04360
                  Axon guidance
                  0.010565
                  DCC, SEMA6A, SEMA4D, PLXNA2, RGS3, NFAT5, CDK5, UNC5C
                
                
                  hsa03013
                  RNA transport
                  0.015948
                  EIF5B, SAP18, GEMIN4, PABPC1, THOC2, EIF1B, EIF3E
                
                
                  hsa00982
                  Drug metabolism - cytochrome P450
                  0.017355
                  ALDH1A3, CYP1A2, CYP3A5, MGST3, UGT2B15
                
                
                  hsa00980
                  Metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450
                  0.017377
                  ALDH1A3, CYP1A2, CYP3A5, MGST3, UGT2B15
                
                
                  hsa05200
                  Pathways in cancer
                  0.018693
                  PPARD, PIAS2, DCC, E2F3, PTEN, PDGFA, CSF1R, MAPK8, PIAS1, BRCA2, CEBPA
                
                
                  hsa03040
                  Spliceosome
                  0.020842
                  DHX15, HNRNPA1, DHX16, THOC2, PRPF3, HNRNPU, SRSF5
                
                
                  hsa04910
                  Insulin signaling pathway
                  0.021514
                  RPS6KB1, MAPK8, MKNK2, TSC1, PHKA1, PRKAG1, PPP1CB
                
                
                  hsa05016
                  Huntington’s disease
                  0.021575
                  POLR2J, NDUFA2, UQCRC1, TGM2, BBC3, NDUFA7, GRIN1, ATP5O
                
                
                  hsa05010
                  Alzheimer’s disease
                  0.023516
                  NDUFA2, UQCRC1, CAPN2, NDUFA7, GRIN1, ATP5O, CDK5
                
                
                  hsa04141
                  Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum
                  0.024488
                  SEC63, P4HB, SAR1A, CAPN2, MAPK8, AMFR, HERPUD1
                
                
                  hsa03060
                  Protein export
                  0.02558
                  SRP54, SEC63, SEC11A
                
                
                  hsa04010
                  MAPK signaling pathway
                  0.026502
                  MAPK8IP2, PDGFA, RRAS, MAPK8, MAP3K11, MKNK2, DUSP3, STK3, CACNB2, MAP3K8
                
                
                  hsa03440
                  Homologous recombination
                  0.031046
                  RPA2, RPA3, BRCA2
                
                
                  hsa05160
                  Hepatitis C
                  0.033309
                  PIAS2, MAPK8, PIAS1, IFNA21, IRF9, EIF3E
                
              
            
          
          
            
              
                Notes.
              
            
            
              
TITLE DEGsdifferentially expressed genes FDRfalse discovery rate RArheumatoid arthritis

            
          
        
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/fig-2
          Figure 2
          
            The protein-protein interaction network of the top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in synovial tissues of RA.
            White and grey rectangle nodes represented up- and down-regulated DEGs, respectively. White ellipse nodes denoted products of genes predicted to interact with the DEGs. The solid line indicated the interaction correlation between proteins.
          
          
        
      
      
        Construction of transcription factors regulatory network
        In our study, TFs regulatory network under the regulation of TFs and target genes were constructed. Based on the TRANSFAC database, total of 42 proteins were identified as TFs of top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in RA. The identified TFs and target genes were applied to construct the TFs-target genes network by Cytoscape software. As shown in Fig. 3, the network consisted of 61 nodes and 142 edges. The DEGs, such as RBFOX2 (degree = 16), POU6F1 (degree = 11), WIPF1 (degree = 10), PFKFB3 (degree = 9) and EIF5B (degree = 9) had the high connectivity with TFs.
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/fig-3
          Figure 3
          
            The transcription factors-target genes regulatory network of top 10 up and down-regulated DEGs in synovial tissues of RA.
            Transcription factors can regulate gene expression through binding to the promoter regions of target genes. The white and grey rectangle nodes represented up- and down-regulated DEGs, respectively. The ellipse nodes represented transcription factors. Solid lines represented regulatory correlation between transcription factors and DEGs. For instance, NSA2 was down-regulated in synovial tissues of RA and its expression level can be regulated by six transcription factors including CP2, COMP1,Nkx2-5, OCT1, Pax4 and HNF-1 based on TRANSFAC database prediction.
          
          
        
      
      
        The expression levels of DEGs were analyzed in the GSE17755 datasets
        
GSE17755 covered the expression profiling of peripheral blood cells from 112 RA patients and 45 health individuals. The descriptive statistics (spread and distribution) of DEGs expression in RA patients compared to healthy individuals were depicted by using box-plot analysis, which was visually illustrated by median and inter-quartile range. As Figs. 4F, 4G and 4K shown, the expression levels of MAT2A and NSA2 were significantly down-regulated and CD47 had the up-regulated tendency in peripheral blood cells of patients with RA, which were consistent with our integrated analysis in RA synovial tissues. However, the expression of LCK, SERBP1, WIPF1, PFKFB3, RBFOX2, ATF6B, POU6F1 and CA5A in GSE17755 was incompatible with our integrated analysis in RA synovial tissues (Figs. 4A–4E, 4H–4J).
        
          10.7717/peerj.3078/fig-4
          Figure 4
          
            The expression levels of DEGs was analyzed in the GSE17755 dataset.
            Box-plot diagram was used to describe the median and inter-quartile range of DEGs expression including LCK (A), SERBP1 (B), WIPF1 (C), PFKFB3 (D), RBFOX2 (E), CD47 (F), MAT2A (G), ATF6B (H), POU6F1 (I), CA5A(J) and NSA2(K).
          
          
        
      
      
        qRT-PCR validation of the expression levels of candidate genes in RA
        qRT-PCR was subjected to validate the expression levels of dysregulated genes in peripheral blood samples of 10 RA patients and 10 healthy individuals. Three candidate DEGs including MAT2A, NSA2 and CD47 were used to apply for qRT-PCR verification. As Figs. 5A and 5B shown, MAT2A (P < 0.01) and NSA2 (P < 0.05) were obviously down-regulated in peripheral blood samples of RA patients compared with healthy individuals. However, the expression level of CD47 (P > 0.05) in peripheral blood samples was not significant difference between RA patients and healthy individuals, but its expression displayed the up-regulated tendency in peripheral blood samples of RA patients.
      
    
    
      Discussion
      Rheumatoid arthritis, a chronic inflammatory disease of joint, is triggered by the complex interaction between genetic susceptibility and dysregulated genes. The clinical manifestations of RA patients present pannus and the abnormal proliferative synovial tissue. Early diagnosis would improve the prognosis and the life quality of RA patients. However, the pathogenesis mechanism of RA is ambiguous and there are no feasible biomarkers for early diagnosis in clinical practice. In our study, bioinformatics analysis-based identification of key genes and pathways in RA were conducted, aiming to provide valuable ground work for further investigation of pathogenesis mechanism of RA.
      
        10.7717/peerj.3078/fig-5
        Figure 5
        
          qRT-PCR validation of candidate DEGs in peripheral blood samples of RA patients and healthy individuals.
          (A) The expression level of MAT2A; (B) the expression level of NSA2; (C) the expression level of CD47. RA represented rheumatoid arthritis and CON represented healthy individuals. * represented P < 0.05 and ** represented P < 0.01.
        
        
      
      RBFOX2 belongs to binding protein, is thought to be a key regulator of alternative exon splicing in the nervous system and other cell types (Venables et al., 2013a). It was one of top 10 up-regulated genes in RA synovial tissues (Table 2). In the TFs regulatory network, RBFOX2 had the highest connectivity with TFs, was regulated by 16 TFs. RBFOX2 is involved in various diseases and biological processes including congenital heart disease, breast cancer, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and pluripotent stem cell differentiation (Homsy et al., 2015; Braeutigam et al., 2014; Cen et al., 2013; Venables et al., 2013b). The mutations of RBFOX2 are associated with congenital heart disease and neuro developmental disabilities (Homsy et al., 2015). During the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, RBFOX2 is an essential regulator to mediate cellular invasion (Braeutigam et al., 2014). To our knowledge, our study first reported the aberrant expression of RBFOX2 in RA, however, the biological function of RBFOX2 in RA needs to be further elucidated.
      CD47 encodes CD47 molecule, a membrane protein, is involved in the increase of intracellular calcium concentration and may play an essential role in membrane transport and signal transduction (Kaur et al., 2015). CD47 was significantly down-regulated in RA (Table 2). In the TFs regulatory network, CD47 was targeted by 6 TFs including v-Myb, SOX-9, HNF-1, COMP-1, E2F and Elk-1. In RA, the interaction between CD47 and thrombospondin-1 could trigger T cell infiltration and expansion in the rheumatoid synovium, and perpetuates the inflammatory process in the rheumatoid joint (Vallejo et al., 2003). CD47 might play essential roles in the progression of RA. In our study, the expression level of CD47 was increased in synovial tissues and peripheral blood cells of patients with RA (Fig. 4F).
      MAT2A encodes methionine adenosyltransferase 2A, is an enzyme that catalyzes the production of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) from methionine and ATP, and is a key methyl donor in cellular processes (Panayiotidis et al., 2006). In our study, MAT2A was the most significantly down-regulated DEG in synovial tissues of RA (Table 2). The previous studies display that MAT2A is associated with uncontrolled cell proliferation in cancer. The protein expression level of MAT2A is decreased in renal cell carcinoma compared to normal tissues (Wang et al., 2014), while MAT2A is over-expressed in various gastrointestinal cancers, such as gastric cancer, colon cancer and liver cancer (Zhang et al., 2013; Tomasi et al., 2013). miR-21-3p targets down-regulation of MAT2A and inhibits cell growth in hepatoma (Lo, Tsai & Chen, 2013). Based on aforementioned information, down-regulated MAT2A in synovial tissues of RA might implicate in cell proliferation, invasiveness of fibroblast-like synoviocytes, which results in erosion of bone and cartilage in RA. The expression of MAT2A in synovial tissues and FLS needs to be validated through quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in a larger sample size of patients with RA and healthy individuals, in addition, the biological roles of MAT2A in FLS needs to be further investigated through in vivo and in vitro experiment. MAT2A had the lower expression in both of peripheral blood cells and synovial tissues of RA patients compared to healthy individuals (Fig. 4G).
      NSA2 encodes NSA2 (Nop seven-associated 2), ribosome biogenesis homolog, locates in the nucleolus of the cell, and is involved in cell cycle regulation and proliferation (Zhang et al., 2010). It had the lower expression level in synovial tissues and peripheral blood cells of RA patients compared to healthy individuals (Table 2, Fig. 4K). Over-expression of the NSA2 protein promotes cell growth and regulates the G1/S transition in the cell cycle in different cell lines including HeLa (human cervical carcinoma), HEK293T (human embryonic kidney) and A549 (human epithelial lung adenocarcinoma) (Zhang et al., 2010; Li et al., 2013). The association between dysregulated NSA2 and pathogenesis of RA has not been reported. The functions of NSA2 in initiation and progression of RA need to be elucidated in the future study.
      Dysregulated DEGs were identified in synovial tissues of patients with RA, and the mRNA expression level of representative DEGs was preliminarily detected in peripheral blood cells of patients with RA based on GSE17755 dataset. As Fig. 4 shown, LCK, SERBP1, WIPF1, PFKFB3 and RBFOX2 were down-regulated in peripheral blood cells of RA, but those genes were up-regulated in synovial tissues of RA; POU6F1 and CA5A were down-regulated in peripheral blood cells of RA, but they were up-regulated in synovial tissues of RA. The contradictory expression status of DEGs in synovial tissues and peripheral blood cells might attribute to different characteristics of expression profiling between synovial tissues and peripheral blood cells in patients with RA. In our bioinformatics analyses, the expression levels of MAT2 and NSA2 were obviously down-regulated both in synovial tissues and peripheral blood samples of RA patients; and CD47 expression was up-regulated both in synovial tissues and with the up-regulated tendency in peripheral blood samples of RA patients. The expression status of MAT2, NSA2 and CD47 in peripheral blood samples of RA patients were validate through qRT-PCR. The qRT-PCR results indicated MAT2A and NSA2 were significantly down-regulated in peripheral blood samples of RA patients and CD47 had the up-regulated tendency in peripheral blood samples of RA patients compared with healthy individuals (Fig. 5). In general, qRT-PCR results of MAT2A, NSA2 and CD47 were compatible with our bioinformatics analyses. The associations between a majority of identitied TFs in the TF-gene regulatory network and RA remain unknown. The roles of a number of identified TFs in other autoimmue disorders are explored. c-Ets-1 belongs to the ETS family of transcript factors and regulates the expression of various immune-related genes. In our work, it was predicted to bind with the promoter of SAR1A, SERBP and TARS. Over-expression of c-Ets-1 in synovial membrane regulates inflammatory angiogenesis in RA through being activated by interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor alpha (Wernert et al., 2002; Redlich et al., 2001). A eQTL analysis indicates that the allele of rs6590330 in ETS1 is associated with decreased ETS1 expression and increases the risk of systemic lupus erythematosus by enhancing the binding of pSTAT1 (Lu et al., 2015). The regulatory significance of identified TFs in development and progression of RA needs to be profoundly investigated in our future work.
      The dysregulated genes in RA were significantly enriched in KEGG pathways including axon guidance, RNA transport and MAPK signaling pathway. Axon guidance represents a key stage in the formation of neuronal network. Axons are guided by a variety of guidance factors, such as netrins, ephrins, slits, and semaphorins. Catalano reports that semaphoring-3A (SEMA3A), a number of semaphorin family, attenuates inflammation and progression of collagen-induced arthritis (Catalano, 2010). SEMA3A is decreased in the immune system of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis murine model of multiple sclerosis, which is one of autoimmunity diseases (Gutierrez-Franco et al., 2016). In our study, down-regulated SEMA6A and up-regulated SEMA4D were significantly enriched in axon guidance pathway. THOC2 (interacted with NR5A1 in PPI network) and EIF58 (one of the top 10 up-regulated DEGs in RA) were significantly enriched in RNA transport pathways. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade is involved in various cellular functions, including cell proliferation, differentiation and migration. A series of articles depict that MAPK signaling pathway associates with RA (Pearson & Jones, 2016; Weisbart et al., 2013; Schett, Zwerina & Firestein, 2008). Increased expression of phosphorylation ezrin may contribute to migration and invasion of fibroblast-like synoviocytes in RA, which are mediated by rho kinase and the p38 MAPK pathway phosphorylation (Xiao et al., 2014). BRAF splice variants activate MAPK through CRAF, increase expression of MT1-MMP, and enhance fibroblast invasion of collagen in RA. Based on the abovementioned information, axon guidance, RNA transport and MAPK signaling pathway might contribute to the progression of RA.
      In our study, RBFOX2 and those dysregulated DEGs interacted with it including DDX5, ATN1, ESR2, RPA2, RPA3 and ATXN2 were significantly enriched in six significant enrichment of biological process and molecular function, such as RNA splicing, signaling transduction, gene expression, protein binding , nucleotide binding and ATP binding (Table S1). NPM1 (interacted with NAS2) was significantly enriched in signal transduction and protein binding (Table S1). Our finding indicated that the protein-protein interactions between dysregulated DEGs might play essential roles in progression and development of RA through those biological processes and molecular functions.
      There are limitations in our study. Firstly, further biological function studies should be performed to investigate the roles of these DEGs and pathways in the progression of RA. Secondly, whether those dysregulated genes in RA have the diagnostic value in RA diagnosis needs to be validated through large cohorts of RA patients and healthy individuals.
    
    
      Conclusions
      In conclusion, we identified 378 DEGs in synovial tissues of RA patients compared to healthy individuals. The top 10 up- and down-regulated genes were selected to establish the PPI network and TF-target genes network. The expression levels of candidate DEGs was preliminarily detected in peripheral blood cells of RA according to GSE17755 dataset. Our study indicated that dysregulated genes in RA might contribute to the progression of RA by regulating biological process, molecular function and signaling pathways based on complex gene regulatory network interaction, such as PPI network and TF-genes regulatory network. Our findings may pave the road for exploring the underlying mechanisms of RA and identifying the potential biomarkers for RA diagnosis.
    
    
       Supplemental Information
      
        10.7717/peerj.3078/supp-1
        Table S1
        
          The top 10 up-/down-regulated DEGs and those DEGs interacted with top 10 up-/down-regulated DEGs enriched in GO terms
          DEGs, differentially expressed genes; FDR, false discovery rate; NA, not available.
        
        
          
            Click here for additional data file.
          
        
      
      
        10.7717/peerj.3078/supp-2
        Table S2
        
          The DEGs interacted with the top 10 up- and down-regulated DEGs in RA
          NA: not applicable; DEGs: differentially expressed genes; RA: rheumatoid arthritis. The predicted proteins of TRD, POU6F1 and CA5A were not available in the BioGRID database and were not shown in Table S2.
        
        
          
            Click here for additional data file.
          
        
      
    
  
        Drug resistance is becoming a serious problem that leads to the failure of standard treatments, which is generally developed because of genetic mutations of certain molecules. Here, we present GEAR (A database of Genomic Elements Associated with drug Resistance) that aims to provide comprehensive information about genomic elements (including genes, single-nucleotide polymorphisms and microRNAs) that are responsible for drug resistance. Right now, GEAR contains 1631 associations between 201 human drugs and 758 genes, 106 associations between 29 human drugs and 66 miRNAs, and 44 associations between 17 human drugs and 22 SNPs. These relationships are firstly extracted from primary literature with text mining and then manually curated. The drug resistome deposited in GEAR provides insights into the genetic factors underlying drug resistance. In addition, new indications and potential drug combinations can be identified based on the resistome. The GEAR database can be freely accessed through http://gear.comp-sysbio.org.
      
    The emergence of drug resistance in clinic leads to the failure of standard treatments, thereby making the treatments of diseases more complex and costly. Specifically, drug resistance is commonly found during anti-infective treatments, such as tuberculosis (TB), Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and malaria. For example, drug resistant TB is prevalent in patients around the world, and multi-drug resistant TB is reported to occur in about 18% of TB patients in 2010 according to World Health Organization (WHO). Recently, acquired resistance was also emerged in cancer cell which not only become resistance to the drugs originally used to treat them, but also cross-resistant to the other drugs1. Therefore, understanding the mechanism of drug resistance may help to improve the drug therapy.
    In general, the resistance to targeted therapy is developed due to certain genetic mutations or alteration of expression. Recently, a large number of mutations have been identified that are responsible for drug resistance with the utilization of high-throughput sequencing2. For example, the expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp), a MDR1 protein product and ABC transporter, is responsible for multidrug resistance to anti-cancer drugs3. Moreover, numerous pre-clinical studies have demonstrated that the mutation of topo-I is a key determinant of CPT-11 sensitivity4. Nowadays, a number of such genes have been identified, which are unfortunately scattered in literature. In literature, large efforts have been made to collect drug resistance related genes, and some valuable resources have been constructed. For example, the HIV drug resistance database56, tuberculosis drug resistance mutation database7, antibiotic resistance database89, and cancer drug resistance database10, among others. Despite the great usefulness of those databases, most of them focus on specific drugs. For instance, the antibiotic resistance database (ARDB) mainly reports the mutations of bacteria genes that lead to resistance to antibiotics. The cancer drug resistance database (CancerDR) provides information on gene mutations that lead to resistance, where the associations were inferred based drug responses in cell lines without explicit evidence. Furthermore, most of existing databases provide gene mutations that are responsible for drug resistance. However, except for genes, those mutations outside of coding genes and within noncoding RNAs (e.g. miRNAs) may also cause drug resistance, which should be further considered11. Therefore, it is highly demanded to develop a comprehensive database about genetic factors conferring human drug resistances.
    In this work, we present GEAR (A database of Genomic Elements Associated with drug Resistance) that aims to provide comprehensive information about genes, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) that are responsible for resistance to drugs. These associations between human drug resistance and genetic factors are firstly extracted from primary literature with text mining and are subsequently manually curated. Figure 1 presents the schematic content of GEAR. The GEAR database provides a user-friendly interactive interface, where cross-links and external links for drugs, genes, miRNAs and SNPs are also provided. Furthermore, the network visualization of the human drug resistome is also provided. The drug resistome deposited in GEAR provides insights into the genetic factors underlying drug resistance. In addition, new indications and potential drug combinations can be identified based on the resistome. The GEAR database can be freely accessed through http://gear.comp-sysbio.org.
    
      Results
      
        Database contents and implications
        GEAR provides a user-friendly and powerful interface to query and visualize the data deposited in the database. The drugs can be easily queried with their PubChem IDs or Drug Names/Synonyms, whereas genes can be queried with their gene IDs or Gene Symbols/Synonyms. For each drug, its chemical structure, target proteins and therapeutic information can be found if available. For each gene, its functional annotations, pathway information and interaction partners can be easily retrieved. Similarly, detailed information about miRNAs and SNPs are also available in GEAR. Furthermore, the crosslinks between different molecules and external links to popular databases, e.g. PubChem and NCBI Gene12, are provided in GEAR. In addition, GEAR provides a very powerful and interactive visualization interface to the drug resistome consists of drug-gene/miRNA/SNP associations, which is visualized with Cytoscape plugins13. These networks can help to understand the molecular underpinnings of drug resistance in a systematic way.
      
      
        Distributions of drugs and resistant genes
        By looking into the drug resistance events deposited in GEAR, we investigated the 201 drugs with known resistant genes. Based on the first level of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system14, these drugs can be grouped into 14 categories (as shown in Table 1). Among those drugs, we can see that anti-cancer and anti-infective agents are more likely to develop resistance as expected.
        In addition, we investigated the functions of those genes that confer drug resistance by performing functional enrichment analysis on the resistant genes associated with drugs belonging to the same ATC category. The results on both pathway and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis imply that for each drug category, the resistant genes associated with those drugs tend to be enriched in biological processes related to drug effects (As shown in Supplementary Table I, where each sheet was represented by the first level of ATC codes). For example, it is known that the insensitivity to drug-induced apoptosis and the ejection of drugs by transporters are the common reasons for the resistance to anti-cancer drugs3. The functional enrichment analysis on the 635 resistant genes associated with cancer drugs indicate that these genes are enriched in the above mentioned resistant pathways and those related to drug therapies, e.g. ABC transporter, apoptosis, cell proliferation and P53 pathways. Furthermore, it is shown that the resistant genes associated with the same drug tend to interact with each other (p-value = 4.21e-161, Fisher’s exact test as shown in Supplementary Table II (F1)).
      
      
        Mechanisms of drug resistance unveiled by the resistome
        In general, the drug actions were accomplished by the interactions between drugs and their target proteins. Therefore, the target proteins are vital to understanding the mechanisms of drug actions. By investigating the targets of drugs (170 drugs have target information in GEAR), we found that almost half of the drugs (percentage = 46%) were single-target drugs and most of them targeted no more than 3 proteins as shown in Fig. 2A, implying that drugs with less targets are more likely to develop resistance. Indeed, we noticed that many of the targets of those drugs were also resistant genes. Therefore, it is not surprising that resistance tends to happen to drugs with less targets considering that diseases will bypass drug actions by mutating the drug targets when treated with single-target agents.
        Recently, it has been found that except for the mutations to drug targets, the dysfunction of certain protein-protein interactions and pathways may also leads to the emergence of drug resistance15. According to the relationships between drug targets and their resistant genes, as shown in Fig. 2B, the drugs can be grouped into three categories: (a) drug targets are resistant genes; (b) drug targets interact with resistant genes; (c) drug targets and resistant genes belong to the same pathway(s). Figure 2B shows the distribution of the drugs with both target and resistant gene information. We found that among the 170 drugs with target information, there were 48 drugs whose target proteins were also resistant genes. For example, the patients who initially responded to Gefitinib eventually become resistant due to the somatic mutations in the EGFR gene that was targeted by Gefitinib16. A small part of drugs were found to develop resistance due to the interactions between their targets and resistant genes. The interactions between resistant genes and drug targets indicated that protein-protein interactions are promising drug targets as reported in literature17. For example, NFKB1 is one target of Dexamethasone while STAT3 was reported as a resistant gene of the drug in GEAR, where the drug was used to treat many inflammatory and autoimmune disorders. It has been reported that the interaction between NFKB1 and STAT3 plays a key role in the interaction between the malignant cell and its microenvironment, and promotes the development and progression of colon, gastric and liver cancers18. Therefore, it is reasonable to see the interaction between these two genes is associated with drug resistance.
        Considering that drugs may develop resistance by blocking or rewiring the molecular contexts of drug targets, the pathway information about both drug targets and resistant genes can help to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance. Among the drugs with both target and resistant gene information available, more than 10% of them have their targets and resistant genes in the same pathway(s). For instance, the resistant genes TP53, JUN and DLD of Etoposide participated in the JNK signaling pathway together with its target gene MAP2K7. The activation of the JNK pathway has been reported to promote the acquired resistance of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia to Etoposide, implying the potential of JNK signaling pathway as a target in treating cancers19. Although the three types of relationships between drug targets and resistant genes can only explain half of resistant drugs, these findings can help better understand drug resistance and design more efficient drugs in the future.
      
      
        Drugs with same resistant genes tend to have similar therapies
        It has been found that drugs with same targets tend to have similar mechanism and therapies. Here, we also investigated whether the drugs sharing resisted genes have similar therapies. By investigating the drugs that share resistant genes, we found that those drugs significantly tend to share the same ATC code (p-value = 9.48e-92, Fisher’s exact test as shown in Supplementary Table II (F2)) and therefore have similar therapeutic effects, where the first level of ATC codes was considered. In addition, we also found that the drug pairs sharing same resistant genes tend to have similar chemical structures (p-value = 3.36e-32, Fisher’s exact test as shown in Supplementary Table II (F2)), which further confirms that the drugs sharing resistant genes have similar therapies.
        Figure 3 shows the clustering of those drugs whose resistant genes are also their targets. From the clustering results, we can see that drugs sharing resistant genes tend to have similar therapies. Furthermore, it can be seen that some genes are associated with multidrug resistance, especially the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters that are responsible for decreased drug accumulation and the development of resistance to anticancer drugs. For example, the genes ABCB1, ABCG2 and ABCC1 were associated with multiple drugs and have been reported to be implicated in the efflux of anticancer drugs, such as Gefitinib, Docetaxel and Doxorubicin20. The results also showed that anticancer drugs (annotated with ATC code L01) may develop resistance with similar mechanisms, e.g. ABC transporters. Moreover, it was found that the resistance of drugs with endocrine therapy (annotated with ATC code L02) was associated with genes ESR1, ESR2 and ERBB2 that play important roles in hormone treatment. These findings indicated that similar drugs may have similar mechanisms when develop resistance.
      
    
    
      Expanded applications
      
        Resistome based drug repositioning
        From the findings observed above, we supposed that drugs sharing resistant genes may have similar therapies. Therefore, new indications are expected to be predicted based on drug resistant genes. With the drug resistome deposited in GEAR, a drug association network can be constructed where an edge will be laid between a pair of drugs if they share at least one resistant gene. In this way, a module extracted from the drug association network consists of drugs that share same resistant gene(s). Figure 4 shows the association network of drugs whose resistant genes are also target genes, where some modules can be clearly observed. By looking at the modules, we noticed that the drugs from the same module tend to share the same ATC codes (p-value = 2.24e-3 by Fisher’s exact test as shown in Supplementary Table II (F3)), where only the first level of the ATC code was considered here. In addition, we found that the drug pairs from the same module tend to have similar chemical structures (p-value = 2.23e-6 by Fisher’s exact test as shown in Supplementary Table II (F3)), whereas the similar chemical structure means similar therapy. Thus, by investigating the modules in the network, we can draw the conclusion that the drugs from the same module tend to have similar therapies, which can be used to predict new indications for old drugs. For example, the drugs Floxuridine and Lapatinib share resistant genes with anti-cancer agents while these two drugs have not been used for treating cancers. Based on the assumption that the drugs sharing resisted genes have similar therapeutic effects, we suggested these two drugs can be used for treating cancers. In fact, it has been reported that Floxuridine was recommended for patients suffering from cancer21, and the drug Lapatinib has been used in combination with Capecitabine for women with HER2-positive breast cancer22. In summary, the drug resistome from GEAR can help predict new indications for old drugs.
      
      
        Resistome based drug combinations
        In clinic, the combinatorial therapies have been widely used to prevent the emergence of drug resistance23, where one agent may be used for inhibiting the resistant genes that confer resistance to the main drugs so that drug effects can be achieved. Therefore, it is possible to predict candidate drug combinations based on drug resistome. For example, in GEAR, BCL2 was recorded to be associated with resistance to Cisplatin, a drug widely used for cancer, where the cancer cells with expression of BCL2 were reported to be more significantly resistant to Cisplatin24. On the other hand, BCL2 is also a target protein of Paclitaxel, where BCL2 will be down-regulated and induced to be phosphorylated by Paclitaxel25. The combinatorial chemotherapy of Cisplain and Paclitaxel has been proved effective for Cisplatin-resistant human epidermoid carcinoma cell line by inducing apoptosis with the phosphorylation of BCL226. In GEAR, ERBB2 has been annotated to enhance cell proliferation and prompt resistance of breast cancer to Letrozole, a drug is used for the treatment of hormonally-responsive breast cancer after surgery. As a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Lapatibinb is able to suppress the expression of ERBB2. In fact, the combination between Letrozole and Lapatinib has been reported to increase the survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer27. Beyond recovering known drug combinations, the resistome from GEAR can help identify potential drug combinations for further investigation. For instance, in GEAR, the gene ABCB1 was annotated to be the resistant gene of Doxorubicin, which was a candidate transporter that efflux Doxorubicin and the upregulation of ABCB1 will acquire resistance to Doxorubicin. Recently, it has been found that the drug Imatinib can prevent acquired resistance of cancer cells to Doxorubicin by inhibiting the expression of ABCB128. Thus, these two drugs may be used together to enhance the efficacy of Doxorubicin.
        The cases shown above clearly demonstrated that the drug resistome in GEAR is really useful for narrowing down candidate drug combinations, and can be used with other information for identifying potential combinatorial therapies29.
      
    
    
      Conclusion
      We introduce GEAR (A database of Genomic Elements Associated with drug Resistance), which provides comprehensive information about genetic factors causing human drug resistance, including variants in genes and miRNAs. We believe this valuable resource can help researchers to investigate the genetics underlying drug resistance, and help understand the molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance. In addition, the drug resistome can help predict new indications of old drugs and potential drug combinations.
    
    
      Materials and Methods
